Reportable  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
Original Civil Jurisdiction 
Writ Petition (C) No. 118 of 2016  
Shayara Bano      … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 
with  
 
Suo Motu Writ (C) No. 2 of 2015  
In Re: Muslim Women’s Quest For Equality 
 
versus 
Jamiat Ulma-I-Hind 
 
Writ Petition(C) No. 288 of 2016  
Aafreen Rehman     … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 
 
Writ Petition(C) No. 327 of 2016  
Gulshan Parveen     … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 
 
Writ Petition(C) No. 665 of 2016  
Ishrat Jahan      … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 
 
Writ Petition(C) No. 43 of 2017  
Atiya Sabri      … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 
 
J  U  D G  M  E  N  T  
Jagdish Singh Khehar, CJI.  
Index  
Sl. 
No. Divisions  Contents  Para -
graphs 
1.  Part -1 The petitioner’s marital discord, and the 
petitioner’s prayers    1- 10 22.  Part -2 The practiced modes of ‘talaq’ amongst 
Muslims  11 - 16  
3.  Part -3 The Holy Quran – with reference to ‘talaq’   17 - 21  
4.  Part -4 Legislation in India, in the field of Muslim 
‘personal law’  22 - 27  
5.  
 Part -5 Abrogation of the practice of ‘talaq -e-biddat’ by 
legislation, the world over, in Islamic, as well 
as, non-Islamic States  28 - 29  
A.  Laws of Arab States  (i) – (xiii) 
B.  Laws of Southeast Asian States  (i) – (iii) 
C.  Laws of Sub -continental States  (i) – (ii) 
6.  Part -6 Judicial pronouncements, on the subject of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’  30 - 34  
7.  Part -7 The petitioner’s and the interven ers’ 
contentions:  35 – 78 
8.  Part -8 The rebuttal of the petitioners ’ contentions   79 - 11 1 
9.  Part -9 Consideration of the rival contentions, and our 
conclusions 112 - 114  
I.  Does the judgment of the Privy Council in the 
Rashid Ahmad case, upholding ‘talaq-e-biddat’, 
require a relook? 11 5-120  
II.  Has ‘talaq -e-biddat’, which is concededly 
sinful, sanction of law? 121 -127  
III.  Is the practice of ‘talaq -e-biddat’, 
approved/disapproved by “hadiths”?  128 -13 9 
 IV.  Is the practice of ‘talaq -e-biddat’, a m atter of 
faith for Muslims? If yes, whether it is a 
constituent of their ‘personal law’? 140 -14 5 
V.  Did the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) 
Application Act, 1937 confer statutory status 
to the subjects regulated by the said 
legislation? 14 6-15 7 
VI.  Does ‘talaq -e-biddat’, violate the parameters 
expressed in Article 25 of the Constitution? 15 8-16 5 
VII.  Constitutional morality and ‘talaq -e-biddat’.  16 6-17 4 
VIII.  Reforms to ‘personal law’ in India.  17 5-182  
IX.  Impact of international conventions and 
declarations on ‘talaq-e-biddat’. 183 -18 9 
 X.  Conclusions emerging out of the above 190 -190 3consideration  
10.  Part -10  The declaration  191 -201  
 
Part-1.  
The petitioner’s marital discord, and the petitioner’s p rayers:  
1. The petitioner-Shayara Bano, has approached this Co urt, for 
assailing the divorce pronounced by her husband – R izwan Ahmad on 
10.10.2015, wherein he affirmed “…in the presence of  witnesses saying that 
I gave ‘talak, talak, talak’, hence like this I divorce  from you from my wife.  
From this date there is no relation of husband and wife .  From today I am 
‘haraam’, and I have become ‘naamharram’.  In future  you are free for using 
your life …”.  The aforesaid divorce was pronounced  before Mohammed 
Yaseen (son of Abdul Majeed) and Ayaaz Ahmad (son o f Ityaz Hussain) – the 
two witnesses.  The petitioner has sought a declaration , that the ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ pronounced by her husband on 10.10.2015 be declared as void ab 
initio .  It is also her contention, that such a divorce which abruptly, 
unilaterally and irrevocably terminates the ties of matr imony, purportedly 
under Section 2 of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) A pplication Act, 1937 
(hereinafter referred to as, the Shariat Act), be decl ared unconstitutional.  
During the course of hearing, it was submitted, that the  ‘talaq-e-biddat’      
(-triple talaq), pronounced by her husband is not vali d, as it is not a part of 
‘Shariat’ (Muslim ‘personal law’).  It is also the pe titioner’s case, that divorce 
of the instant nature, cannot be treated as “rule of dec ision” under the 
Shariat Act.  It was also submitted, that the practice of ‘ talaq-e-biddat’ is 
violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed to citizens  in India, under 4Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution. It is also t he petitioner’s case, 
that the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ cannot be protecte d under the rights 
granted to religious denominations (-or any sections th ereof) under Articles 
25(1), 26(b) and 29 of the Constitution.  It was submit ted, that the practice 
of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is denounced internationally, and further, a large number 
of Muslim theocratic countries, have forbidden the prac tice of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’, and as such, the same cannot be considered  sacrosanctal to the 
tenets of the Muslim religion. 
2. The counter affidavit filed by respondent no.5 – th e petitioner’s 
husband – Rizwan Ahmad, discloses, that the ‘nikah’ (m arriage) between the 
petitioner and the respondent was solemnized on 11.04.2 001, as per 
‘Shariat’, at Allahabad.  It was submitted, that the petition er – Shayara 
Bano, performed her matrimonial duties intermittently, c oming and leaving 
the matrimonial home from time to time.  The matrimonial relationship 
between the parties resulted in the births of two childr en, a son – 
Mohammed Irfan (presently about 13 years old) studyin g in the 7 th  
standard, and a daughter – Umaira Naaz (presently abou t 11 years old) 
studying in the 4 th  standard, both at Allahabad. 
3. It is the case of the respondent–husband, that the p etitioner-wife, 
left her matrimonial home on 9.4.2015 in the company o f her father – Iqbal 
Ahmad and maternal uncle – Raees Ahmed, as well as c hildren – 
Mohammed Irfan and Umaira Naaz, to live in her paren tal home.  The 
respondent claims, that he continued to visit the petition er, for giving her 
maintenance, and for enquiring about her well being.  When the husband 5met the wife at her parental home in May and June 2015,  she refused to 
accompany him, and therefore, refused to return to the matrimonial home.  
On 03.07.2015, Rizwan Ahmad, asked the father of Shay ara Bano to send 
her back to her matrimonial home.  He was informed by  her father, after a 
few days, that the petitioner was not inclined to live with  the respondent. 
4. On 07.07.2015 the father of the petitioner, brought the  two children 
– Mohammed Irfan and Umaira Naaz to Allahabad.  The husband submits, 
that both the children have thereafter been in his care and custody, at 
Allahabad.  It is the assertion of the husband, that the petitioner’s father 
had given him the impression, that the petitioner would  be inclined to 
return to Allahabad, consequent upon the husband’s care  and custody of 
both children, at the matrimonial home.   
5. It is claimed by the respondent-husband, that he ma de another 
attempt to bring back the petitioner-wife from her parental  home on 
09.08.2015, but Shayara Bano refused to accompany him .  It is submitted, 
that Rizwan Ahmad was opposed in the above endeavour, both by the 
petitioner’s father and her maternal uncle. 
6. Finding himself in the above predicament, Rizwan Ahmad 
approached the Court of the Principal Judge, Family Co urt at Allahabad, 
Uttar Pradesh, by preferring Matrimonial Case No.1144 of 2015 with a 
prayer for restitution of conjugal rights. The petitione r-Shayara Bano, 
preferred Transfer Petition (C) No. 1796 of 2015, und er Section 25 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, read with Order XXXV I-B of the Supreme 
Court Rules, 1966, for the transfer of Matrimonial Case  No.1144 of 2015, 6filed by the respondent-husband (seeking restitution o f conjugal rights) 
pending at Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh, to the Principal J udge, Family Court, 
Kashipur, Uttarakhand.  In the above transfer petition, th e wife inter alia  
asserted as under: 
“2.3 The Petitioner who hails from Kashipur, Uttarakhan d is 
unemployed and her father is a government employee.  The only source 
of income is the Petitioner’s father who has a low inco me and despite this 
the Petitioner during the time of marriage had made arra ngements 
beyond their capacity.  But soon after the marriage the  Respondent 
husband started demanding for additional dowry and mad e 
unreasonable demands for a car and cash. 
2.4 The Petitioner who rightfully denied the demands of  the Respondent 
was tortured and physically abused by the Respondent a nd his family.  
She was often beaten and kept hungry in a closed roo m for days.  The 
family of the Respondent administered her with medicine s that caused 
her memory to fade.  Due to the medicines she remained  unconscious for 
long hours. 
xxx   xxx   xxx 
2.6  On 09.04.2015, the Respondent attempted to kill the Petitioner by 
administering medicines.  These medicines on  inspec tion by a doctor on 
a later date were revealed to cause loss of mental ba lance after regular 
consumption.  The Respondent brought the Petitioner to Mor adabad in a 
critical near-death condition with the intention of aban doning her if his 
dowry demands were not fulfilled. 
2.7. Thereafter on 10.04.2015 the Respondent called th e parents of the 
Petitioner to Moradabad to take their daughter.  The paren ts of the 
Petitioner requested him to come to Kashipur to meet and settle the 
issue.  He refused to go to Kashipur and said that they  should come and 
take their daughter or fulfil his demands for more dow ry.  He demanded 
Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lakh Only). 
2.8. Due to the unreasonable demands and the torturous  behaviour of 
the Respondent husband, the Petitioner’s parents came to Moradabad to 
take her and she was forced to stay with her parents aft er 10.04.2015. 
  xxx   xxx   xxx 
2.13 The Respondent has filed for restitution despite the  fact that he 
himself had asked the Petitioner wife’s father to either fulfil his dowry 
demands or to take the Petitioner back to her maternal h ome and in 
pursuance of the same had drugged the Petitioner and ha d left her in 
Moradabad.” 
 
7. It is the case of the respondent-Rizwan Ahmad, tha t in view of the 
above averments of the petitioner-Shayara Bano, he felt that his wife was 7not ready for reconciliation, and therefore, he withdr ew the suit (-for 
restitution of conjugal rights), preferred by him at All ahabad, and divorced 
the petitioner-Shayara Bano, by serving upon her a ‘ta laq-nama’ (deed of 
divorce) dated 10.10.2015.  The text of the ‘talak-nam a’, is reproduced 
below: 
“Deed of Divorce 
Dated 10.10.2015 
Madam, 
Shayra Bano D/o Iqbal Ahmad. 
Be it clear that I Rizwan Ahmed married with you withou t any dowry to 
spend a peaceful and happy marital life.  After marr iage you came in my 
marital tie.  From the relation between you and me two issues namely 
Irfan Ahmad aged about 13 years and Kumari Humaira N az @ Muskan 
aged about 11 years were born who are receiving educ ation living under 
my guardianship.  With a great sorrow it is being writ ten that you, just 
after 6 months of marriage, with your unreasonable an d against Sharia 
acts started to pressurize me to live separately from my  parents.  I, in 
order to keep you happy and as per your wish started to  live at a rented 
house at Mohalla Ghausnagar and while working as a c lerk under a 
builder tried my level best to spend peaceful marital life with you and 
children.  However, you, in an unreasonable manner and against Shriah 
continued to create problem and quarrel in house on r egular basis.  
When you were asked the reason in a very affectionate manner about two 
years ago, you had put a condition that now when your o ther relatives 
are not with you in such situation come with me to my pa rents’ house 
and live further life there.  I being a person from a  self-respecting family 
refused to live as ‘son in law living at in-laws hous e’.  Then you, under 
the influence of your parents, continued to fake variou s mental and 
physical pains and continued to behave life a mental patient.  When tried 
to know the reason then you after much difficulty told  that you had med 
with a serious accident before marriage.  I for the s ake of my children 
and you tolerated that.  I became despondent from your persistent 
demand of living at your parental house and your bein g of stubborn 
nature, your giving threat of implicating in false case  and threat of 
inflicting injury to yourself and of consuming poiso n and implicating me 
in false case on that count given on daily basis and c omplained about 
the same to your paternal uncle but your father replied that whenever 
you do such acts sleeping pills be given to you.  I f ound this very baffling, 
upon asking your father told that since the time before your marriage 
you had been under treatment for mental ailment.  I ign ored such a big 
incident and the information received about you.  Resul tantly you 
became audacious in your behavior.  When reported a ll these things to 
your father, your father told me that this is the time of children’s 8holidays you be sent to your parents’ house with childr en.  You take 
them back after the atmosphere is changed and summer vacations are 
over.  Acting on the words of your father I left you at your parents’ place 
along with children and while going, you took away go ld jewelry given by 
me including a gold neck set of two Tolas, gold bang les of one and a half 
Tola, two gold rings of half Tola and cash Rs.15,00 0/-.  I continued to 
visit you enquiring your wellbeing and giving you ex penses from time to 
time.  That in the month of May and June when I tried to bring you then 
you gave excuses and pleas.  I continued to make repe ated attempts 
between May to July to bring you back but ultimately o n 03.07.2015 you 
clearly refused to return and on 07.07.2015 you father  brought both the 
children at Allahabad Railway Station and left them there  informing me 
and gave threat on phone that either you will come here and live or shall 
perform the role of father and mother of both the chil dren.  In this regard 
when I enquired from you then you also refused to retu rn in clear words 
and said to the extent that you raise the children and for get me or 
separate from me to bring another mother for the child ren.  On this also I 
could not satisfy myself, whereupon I filed a suit fo r bringing you back.  
After receiving notice, out of the blues you threatened  me on phone that I 
will soon file a case and will tell you how a son in  law is kept at the in-
laws house.  Being fed up with your unreasonable con duct and against 
Sharaih acts I found it better to separate from you, th erefore, I on 
8.10.2015 applied for dismissal of the suit for bring ing you back and now 
I, in my full senses and in the presence of margina l witnesses, release 
you from my marriage in the light of Shariah through tr ipel talaq by 
uttering ‘I give talaq’, ‘I give talaq’, ‘I give talaq’.   From today the relation 
of husband and wife forever ends between you and me .  After today you 
are unlawful for me and I have become unlawful for you.  You are free to 
spend your life the way you want. 
Note:  So far is the question of your dower (Mehr) an d expenses of 
waiting period (iddat) that I am paying through demand d raft no.096976 
dated 06.10.2015 drawn at Allahabad Bank, Karaili, Al lahabad Branch, 
which comprises a sum of Rs.10,151 towards payment of  dower and 
Rs.5,500/- towards the expenses of waiting period whic h I am sending 
along with this written deed of divorce, you kindly tak e paid to accept the 
same. 
Dated 10.10.2015 
Witnesses:- 
1. Mohd. Yaseen, s/o Abdul Majid, R/o J.K. Colony, Ghaus Nagar, 
Karaili, Allahabad; 
2.  Ayaz Ahmed S/o Imtiyaz Hussain R/o G.T.B. Nagar,  Karaili Scheme, 
Allahabad 
Only 
Sd/ Hindi Rizwan Ahmed 
(Rizwan Ahmed) 
S/o Iqbal Ahmed 
Ghaus Nagar, Karaili, Allahabad” 98. Based on the above, the case of the respondent-husb and is, that he 
had pronounced ‘talaq’ in consonance with the prevalen t and valid mode of 
dissolution of Muslim marriages. It was submitted, tha t the pronouncement 
of divorce by him, fulfils all the requirements of a  valid divorce, under the 
Hanafi sect of Sunni Muslims, and is in consonance w ith ‘Shariat’ (Muslim 
‘personal law’).   
9. It is also the submission of the respondent-husban d, that the 
present writ petition filed by the petitioner-wife under A rticle 32 of the 
Constitution of India, is not maintainable, as the ques tions raised in the 
petition are not justiciable under Article 32 of the Cons titution. 
10. Keeping in view the factual aspect in the present ca se, as also, the 
complicated questions that arise for consideration in th is case (and, in the 
other connected cases), at the very outset, it was decide d to limit the instant 
consideration, to ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq.  Other questions raised in 
the connected writ petitions, such as, polygamy and ‘ha lala’ (-and other 
allied matters), would be dealt with separately.  The  determination of the 
present controversy, may however, coincidentally rende r an answer even to 
the connected issues. 
Part-2.  
The practiced modes of ‘talaq’ amongst Muslims:  
11. Since the issue under consideration is the dissolu tion of marriage 
by ‘talaq’, under the Islamic law of divorce, it is i mperative, to understand 
the concept of ‘talaq’.  In this behalf, it is relevant to  mention, that under  
the Islamic law, divorce is classified into three cat egories.  Talaq understood 10 simply, is a means of divorce, at the instance of the h usband. ‘Khula’, is 
another mode of divorce, this divorce is at the instanc e of the wife.  The 
third category of divorce is ‘mubaraat’ – divorce by mutual consent. 
12. ‘Talaq’, namely, divorce at the instance of the hus band, is also of 
three kinds – ‘talaq-e-ahsan’, ‘talaq-e-hasan’ and ‘tal aq-e-biddat’.  The 
petitioner’s contention before this Court is, that ‘talaq-e -ahsan’, and ‘talaq-
e-hasan’ are both approved by the ‘Quran’ and ‘hadith ’.  ‘Talaq-e-ahsan’, is 
considered as the ‘most reasonable’ form of divorce, whereas, ‘talaq-e-
hasan’ is also considered as ‘reasonable’.  It was s ubmitted, that ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ is neither recognized by the ‘Quran’ nor by ‘ hadith’, and as such, is 
to be considered as sacrosanctal to Muslim religion.  The controversy which 
has arisen for consideration before this Court, is w ith referenc to ‘talaq-e-
biddat’.   
13. It is necessary for the determination of the presen t controversy, to 
understand the parameters, and the nature of the differe nt kinds of ‘talaq’. 
‘Talaq-e-ahsan’ is a single pronouncement of ‘talaq’ by the husband, 
followed by a period of abstinence.  The period of a bstinence is described as 
‘iddat’.  The duration of the ‘iddat’ is ninety days or three menstrual cycles 
(in case, where the wife is menstruating).  Alternativel y, the period of ‘iddat’ 
is of three lunar months (in case, the wife is not me nstruating).  If the 
couple resumes cohabitation or intimacy, within the pe riod of ‘iddat’, the 
pronouncement of divorce is treated as having been re voked.  Therefore, 
‘talaq-e-ahsan’ is revocable. Conversely, if there is  no resumption of 
cohabitation or intimacy, during the period of ‘iddat’,  then the divorce 11 becomes final and irrevocable, after the expiry of th e ‘iddat’ period.  It is 
considered irrevocable because, the couple is forbid den to resume marital 
relationship thereafter, unless they contract a fresh ‘n ikah’ (-marriage), with 
a fresh ‘mahr’.  ‘Mahr’ is a mandatory payment, in the  form of money or 
possessions, paid or promised to be paid, by the groo m or by the groom’s 
father, to the bride, at the time of marriage, which lega lly becomes her 
property.  However, on the third pronouncement of such  a ‘talaq’, the 
couple cannot remarry, unless the wife first marries someone else, and only 
after her marriage with other person has been dissolv ed (either through 
‘talaq’ - divorce, or death), can the couple remarry.    Amongst Muslims, 
‘talaq-e-ahsan’ is regarded as – ‘the most proper’ fo rm of divorce. 
14. ‘Talaq-e-hasan’ is pronounced in the same manne r, as ‘talaq-e-
ahsan’.  Herein, in place of a single pronouncement,  there are three 
successive pronouncements. After the first pronounce ment of divorce, if 
there is resumption of cohabitation within a period of  one month, the 
pronouncement of divorce is treated as having been re voked.  The same 
procedure is mandated to be followed, after the expiry  of the first month 
(during which marital ties have not been resumed).  ‘ Talaq’ is pronounced 
again.  After the second pronouncement of ‘talaq’, if th ere is resumption of 
cohabitation within a period of one month, the pronou ncement of divorce is 
treated as having  been revoked.  It is significant to note, that the first and 
the second pronouncements may be revoked by the husban d.  If he does so, 
either expressly or by resuming conjugal relations, ‘ talaq’ pronounced by 
the husband becomes ineffective, as if no ‘talaq’ had ever been expressed.  If 12 the third ‘talaq’ is pronounced, it becomes irrevocable .  Therefore, if no 
revocation is made after the first and the second decla ration, and the 
husband makes the third pronouncement, in the third ‘tuhr ’ (period of 
purity), as soon as the third declaration is made, the ‘talaq’ becomes 
irrevocable, and the marriage stands dissolved, where after, the wife has to 
observe the required ‘iddat’ (the period after divorce , during which a woman 
cannot remarry.  Its purpose is to ensure, that the male parent of any 
offspring is clearly identified). And after the third ‘iddat’, the husband and 
wife cannot remarry, unless the wife first marries som eone else, and only 
after her marriage with another person has been dis solved (either through 
divorce or death), can the couple remarry.  The distin ction between ‘talaq-e-
ashan’ and ‘talaq-e-hasan’ is, that in the former there is a single 
pronouncement of ‘talaq’ followed by abstinence during  the period of ‘iddat’, 
whereas, in the latter there are three pronouncements of ‘talaq’, 
interspersed with abstinence.  As against ‘talaq-e-ahsa n’, which is regarded 
as ‘the most proper’ form of divorce, Muslims regard ‘talaq-e-hasan’ only as 
‘the proper form of divorce’. 
15. The third kind of ‘talaq’ is – ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  T his is effected by one 
definitive pronouncement of ‘talaq’ such as, “I talaq you irrevocably” or 
three simultaneous pronouncements, like “talaq, talaq, ta laq”, uttered at 
the same time, simultaneously.  In ‘talaq-e-biddat’, di vorce is effective 
forthwith.  The instant talaq, unlike the other two catego ries of ‘talaq’ is 
irrevocable at the very moment it is pronounced.  Even amongst Muslims 
‘talaq-e-biddat’, is considered irregular. 13 16. According to the petitioner, there is no mention of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ in 
the Quran.  It was however acknowledged, that the practic e of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ can be traced to the second century, after the ad vent of Islam.  It 
was submitted, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is recognized only  by a few Sunni 
schools.  Most prominently, by the Hanafi sect of Sunn i Muslims.  It was 
however emphasized, that even those schools that recogni zed ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ described it, “as a sinful form of divorce”.   It is acknowledged, that 
this form of divorce, has been described as “bad in theology, but good in 
law”.  We have recorded the instant position at this ju ncture, because 
learned counsel for the rival parties, uniformly ackn owledge the same. 
Part-3.  
The Holy Quran – with reference to ‘talaq’ : 
17. Muslims believe that the Quran was revealed by Go d to the Prophet 
Muhammad over a period of about 23 years, beginning  from 22.12.609, 
when Muhammad was 40 years old.  The revelation cont inued upto the year 
632 – the year of his death. Shortly after Muhammad’s death, the Quran 
was completed by his companions, who had either writte n it down, or had 
memorized parts of it. These compilations had differen ces of perception.  
Therefore, Caliph Usman - the third, in the line of c aliphs recorded a 
standard version of the Quran, now known as Usman’s c odex.  This codex is 
generally treated, as the original rendering of the Qu ran. 
18. During the course of hearing, references to the Quran were made 
from ‘The Holy Quran: Text Translation and Commentary’  by Abdullah 
Yusuf Ali, (published by Kitab Bhawan, New Delhi, 14th  edition, 2016). 14 Learned counsel representing the rival parties commend ed, that the text 
and translation in this book, being the most reliable, could safely be relied 
upon.  The text and the inferences are therefore drawn  from the above 
publication.   
(i) The Quran is divided into ‘suras’ (chapters).  Ea ch ‘sura’ contains 
‘verses’, which are arranged in sections.  Since our  determination is limited 
to the validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, within the framewo rk of the Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, we shall only make a ref erence to such ‘verses’ 
from the Quran, as would be relevant for our above de termination. In this 
behalf, reference may first be made to ‘verses’ 222 a nd 223 contained in 
‘section’ 28 of ‘sura’ II.  The same are reproduced below: 
“222. They ask thee 
Concerning women’s courses. 
Say : They are 
A hurt and a pollution : 
So keep away from women 
In their courses, and do not 
Approach them until 
They are clean. 
But when they have 
Purified themselves, 
Ye may approach them 
In any manner, time, or place 
Ordained for you by God. 
For God loves those 
Who turn to Him constantly 
And he loves those 
Who keep themselves pure and clean. 
 
223.Your wives are 
As a tilth unto you ; 
So approach your tilth 
When or how ye will ; 
But do some good act 
For your souls beforehand ; 
And fear God, 
And know that ye are 15 To meet Him (in the Hereafter), 
And give (these) good tidlings 
To those who believe.” 
 
The above ‘verses’ have been extracted by us for the reason, that the Quran 
mandates respectability at the hands of men – towards w omen.  ‘Verse’ 222 
has been interpreted to mean, that matters of physical cl eanliness and 
purity should be looked at, not only from a man’s po int of view, but also 
from the woman’s point of view.  The ‘verse’ mandates , that if there is 
danger of hurt to the woman, she should have every con sideration. The 
Quran records, that the action, of men towards women are  often worse.  It 
mandates, that the same should be better with reference to  the woman’s 
health, both  mental and spiritual.  ‘Verse’ 223 postu lates, that sex is as 
solemn, as any other aspect of life.  It is compared  to a husband-man’s tilth, 
to illustratively depict, that in the same manner as a h usband-man sows 
his fields, in order to reap a harvest, by choosing his own time and mode of 
cultivation, by ensuring that he does not sow out of s eason, or cultivate in a 
manner which will injure or exhaust the soil.  So al so, in the relationship 
towards a wife, ‘verse’ 223 exalts the husband, to be w ise and considerate 
towards her, and treat her in such manner as will neith er injure nor 
exhaust her. ‘Verses’ 222 and 223 exhort the husband , to extend every kind 
of mutual consideration, as is required towards a wife .   
(ii) Reference is also necessary to ‘verses’ 224 to 2 28 contained in 
section 28 of ‘sura’ II of the Quran.  The same are e xtracted below: 
“224. And make not  
God’s (name) an excuse 
In your oaths against 
Doing good, or acting rightly, 16 Or making peace 
Between persons; 
For God is one 
Who heareth and knoweth 
All things. 
225. God will not 
Call you to account  
For thoughtlessness 
In your oaths, 
But for the intention 
In your hearts;  
And He is  
Oft-forgiving  
Most Forbearing. 
226. For those who take 
An oath for abstention 
From their wives, 
A waiting for four months 
Is ordained; 
If then they return, 
God is Oft-forgiving, 
Most Merciful. 
227. But if their intention 
Is firm for divorce, 
God heareth 
And knoweth all things. 
228. Divorced women  
Shall wait concerning themselves 
For three monthly periods. 
Nor is it lawful for them 
To hide what God 
Hath created in their wombs, 
If they have faith 
In God and the Last Day. 
And their husbands 
Have the better right 
To take them back 
In that period, if 
They wish for reconciliation. 
And women shall have rights 
Similar to the rights 
Against them, according 
To what is equitable;  
But men have a degree 
(Of advantage) over them 
And God is Exalted in Power 
Wise.” 17 ‘Verse’ 224, has a reference to many special kinds o f oaths practised 
amongst Arabs.  Some of the oaths even related to matter s concerning sex. 
These oaths caused misunderstanding, alienation, divis ion or separation 
between husbands and wives.  ‘Verses’ 224 to 227 are  pointed references to 
such oaths.  Through ‘verse’ 224, the Quran ordains i n general terms, that 
no one should make an oath – in the name of God, as a n excuse for not 
doing the right thing, or for refraining from doing s omething which will 
bring people together.  The text relied upon suggests,  that ‘verses’ 225 to 
227 should be read together with ‘verse’ 224.  ‘Verse’  224 is general and 
leads up to the next three ‘verses’.  These ‘verses’ ar e in the context of 
existing customs, which were very unfair to married wo men.  Illustratively, 
it was sought to be explained, that in a fit of anger or  caprice, sometimes a 
husband would take an oath – in the name of God, not to approach his wife.  
This act of the husband, it was sought to be explained,  deprives the wife of 
her conjugal rights, and yet, keeps her tied to the hu sand indefinitely, 
inasmuch as, she has no right to remarry.  Even if th is act of the husband, 
was protested by the wife, the explanation provided is, that the husband 
was bound – by the oath in the name of God.  Through  the above verses, the 
Quran disapproves thoughtless oaths, and at the same time , insists on a 
proper solemn and conscious/purposeful oath, being s crupulously 
observed.  The above ‘verses’ caution  husbands to un derstand, that an 
oath in the name of God was not a valid excuse – sinc e God looks at 
intention, and not mere thoughtless words. It is in the se circumstances, 
that ‘verses’ 226 and 227 postulate, that the husband an d wife in a difficult 18 relationship, are allowed a period of four months, to determine whether an 
adjustment is possible.  Even though reconciliation is recommended, but if 
the couple is against reconciliation, the Quran ordain s, that it is unfair to 
keep the wife tied to her husband indefinitely.  The Qu ran accordingly 
suggests, that in such a situation, divorce is the only fair and equitable 
course.  All the same it is recognized, that divorce is  the most hateful 
action, in the sight of the God.   
(iii) ‘Verses’ 229 to 231 contained in ‘section’ 29 of  ‘sura’ II, and ‘verses’ 
232 and 233 included in ‘section’ 30 of ‘sura’ II, a s also ‘verse’ 237 
contained in ‘section’ 31 in ‘sura’ II, are relevant o n the issue of divorce.  
The same are extracted below: 
“229. A divorce is only  
Permissible twice: after that,  
The parties should either hold 
Together on equitable terms, 
Or separate with kindness. 
It is not lawful for you, 
(Men), to take back 
Any of your gifts (from your wives),  
Except when both parties 
Fear that they would be  
Unable to keep the limits 
Ordained by God. 
If ye (judges) do indeed  
Fear that they would be 
Unable to keep the limits  
Ordained by God, 
There  is no blame on either 
Of them if she give 
Something for her freedom. 
These are the limits  
Ordained by God; 
So do not transgress them 
If any do transgress 
The limits ordained by God, 
Such persons wrong 
(Themselves as well as others) 19 230.So if a husband 
Divorces his wife (irrevocably), 
He cannot, after that, 
Re-marry her until 
After she has married 
Another husband and  
He has divorced her. 
In that case there is 
No blame on either of them 
If they re-unite, provided 
They feel that they 
Can keep the limits 
Ordained by God. 
Such are the limits 
Ordained by God, 
Which He makes plain 
To those who understand. 
231.When ye divorce 
Women, and they fulfil 
The term of their (‘Iddat’) 
Either taken them back 
On equitable terms 
Or set them free 
On equitable terms; 
But do not take them back 
To injure them, (or) to take 
Undue advantage; 
If any one does that, 
He wrongs his own soul. 
Do not treat God’s Signs 
As a jest, 
But solemnly rehearse 
God’s favours on you, 
And the fact that He 
Send down to you 
The Book 
And Wisdom, 
For your instruction. 
And fear God, 
And know that God 
Is well acquainted 
With all things.” 
  
A perusal of the aforesaid ‘verses’ reveals, that divo rce for the reason of 
mutual incompatibility is allowed. There is however a recorded word of 
caution – that the parties could act in haste and then r epent, and thereafter 20 again reunite, and yet again, separate.  To prevent e rratic and fitful 
repeated separations and  reunions, a limit of two divorces is prescribed.  In  
other words, reconciliation after two divorces is allo wed.  After the second 
divorce, the parties must definitely make up their mind,  either to dissolve 
their ties permanently, or to live together honourably, i n mutual love and 
forbearance – to hold together on equitable terms.  Ho wever, if separation is 
inevitable even on reunion after the second divorce, e asy reunion is not 
permitted.  The husband and wife are forbidden from casting aspersions on 
one another.  They are mandated to recognize, what is right and 
honourable, on a collective consideration of all circ umstances.  After the 
divorce, a husband cannot seek the return of gifts or p roperties, he may 
have given to his wife.  Such retention by the wife is permitted, only in 
recognition that the wife is economically weaker.  An  exception has been 
carved out in the second part of ‘verse’ 229, that in s ituations where the 
freedom of the wife could suffer on account of the hus band refusing to 
dissolve the marriage, and perhaps, also treat her with  cruelty.  It is 
permissible for the wife, in such a situation, to exte nd some material 
consideration to the husband.  Separation of this kind , at the instance of 
the wife, is called ‘khula’.  ‘Verse’ 230 is in cont inuation of the first part of 
‘verse’ 229.  The instant ‘verse’ recognizes the permi ssibility of reunion after 
two divorces.  When divorce is pronounced for the thi rd time, between the 
same parties, it becomes irreversible, until the woman  marries some other 
man and he divorces her (or is otherwise released f rom the matrimonial tie, 
on account of his death).  The Quranic expectation in ‘ verse’ 230, requires 21 the husband to restrain himself, from dissolving the m atrimonial tie, on a 
sudden gust of temper or anger.  ‘Verse’ 231 provides , that a man who takes 
back his wife after two divorces, must not put pressu re on her, to prejudice 
her rights in any way.  Remarriage must only be on eq uitable terms, 
whereupon, the husband and wife are expected to lead a clean and 
honourable life, respecting each other’s personalities .  The Quranic message 
is, that the husband should either take back the wife on equitable terms, or 
should set her free with kindness.  
(iv) The ‘verses’ referred to above need to be unders tood along with 
‘verses’ 232 and 233, contained in ‘section’ 20 of ‘s ura’ II, of the Quran.  The 
above two ‘verses’ are extracted below: 
“232. When ye divorce 
Women, and they fulfil 
 The term of their (‘Iddat’), 
 Do not prevent them 
From marrying 
Their (former) husbands, 
If they mutually agree 
On equitable terms. 
This instruction 
Is for all amongst you, 
Who believe in God 
And the Last Day. 
That is (the course Making for) more virtue 
And purity amongst you, 
And God knows, 
And ye know not. 
233. The mothers shall give suck 
To their offspring 
For two whole years, 
If the father desires 
To complete the term. 
But he shall bear the cost 
Of their food and clothing 
On equitable terms. 
No soul shall have 
A burden laid on it 22 Greater than it can bear. 
No mother shall be 
Treated unfairly 
On account of his child, 
An heir shall be chargeable 
In the same way. 
If they both decide 
On weaning, 
By mutual consent, 
And after due consultation, 
There is no blame on them. 
If ye decide 
On a foster-mother 
For your offspring, 
There is no blame on you, 
Provided ye pay (the mother) 
What ye offered, 
On equitable terms. 
But fear God and know 
That God sees well 
What ye do.” 
 
A perusal of the above ‘verses’ reveals, that the termi nation of the contract 
of marriage, is treated as a serious matter for family  and social life.  And as 
such, every lawful advice, which can bring back thos e who had lived 
together earlier, provided there is mutual love and they  can live with each 
other on honourable terms, is commended.  After foll owing the above 
parameters, the Quran ordains, that it is not right for outsiders to prevent 
the reunion of the husband and wife.  ‘Verse’ 233 is  in the midst of the 
regulations on divorce.  It applies primarily to cases  of divorce, where some 
definite rule is necessary, as the father and mother wo uld not, on account 
of divorce, probably be on good terms, and the interes t of children must be 
safeguarded.  Since the language of ‘verse’ 233 is g eneral, the edict 
contained therein is interpreted, as applying equally to the father and 23 mother, inasmuch as, each must fulfil his or her part , in the fostering of 
children.   
(v) The last relevant ‘verse’ in ‘sura’ II of the Qura n, is contained in 
‘section’ 31, namely, ‘verse’ 237.  The same is repr oduced below: 
“237. And if ye divorce them 
Before consummation, 
But after the fixation 
Of a dower for them, 
Then the half of the dower  
(Is due to them), unless 
They remit it 
Or (the man’s half) is remitted 
By him in whose hands 
Is the marriage tie; 
And the remission 
(Of the man’s half) 
Is the nearest to righteousness. 
And do not forget 
Liberality between yourselves. 
For God sees well 
All that ye do.” 
 
In case of divorce before consummation of marriage, it is recognized, that 
only half the dower fixed needed to be refunded to the wife.  It is however 
open to the wife, to remit the half due to her.  And like wise, it is open to the 
husband to remit the half which he is entitled to deduc t (and thus pay the 
whole dower amount). 
19. Reference is also necessary to ‘verses’ 34 and 3 5, contained in 
‘section’ 6, as well as, ‘verse’ 128 contained in ‘se ction’ 19, of ‘sura’ IV.  All 
the above verses are extracted below: 
“34. Men are the protectors 
And maintainers of women, 
Because God has given  
The one more (strength) 
Than the other, and because 
They support them 24 From their means. 
Therefore the righteous women 
Are devoutly obedient, and guard 
In (the husband’s) absence 
What God would have them 
guard. 
As to those women 
On whose part ye fear 
Disloyalty and ill-conduct, 
Admonish them (first), 
(Next), refuse to share their beds, 
(And last) beat them (lightly);  
But if they return to obedience, 
Seek not against them 
Means (of annoyance): 
For God is Most High, 
Great (above you all). 
35. If ye fear a breach 
Between them twain, 
Appoint (two) arbiters, 
One from his family, 
And the other from hers; 
If they wish for peace,  
God will cause 
Their reconciliation: 
For God hath full knowledge, 
And is acquainted 
With all things.” 
Section 19, Sura IV 
“128.If a wife fears  
Cruelty or desertion 
On her husband’s part, 
There is no blame on them, 
If they arrange 
An amicable settlement 
Between themselves; 
And such settlement is best; 
Even though men’s souls  
Are swayed by greed. 
But if ye do good 
And practice self-restraint 
God is well-acquainted 
With all that ye do.” 
 
The Quran declares men as protectors, and casts a duty  on them to 
maintain their women.  In order to be entitled to the husb and’s support, the 25 Quran ordains the women to be righteous, and to be d evoutly obedient to 
the husband, even in his absence. ‘Verse’ 34, extend s to the husband the 
right to admonish his wife who is either disloyal, or  ill-conducts herself.  
Such admonition can be by refusing to share her bed, and as a last resort, 
even to beat her lightly.  Thereafter, if the woman do es not return to 
obedience, the husband is advised not to use means of annoyance against 
her.  ‘Verse’ 35, sets out the course of settlement of f amily disputes.  It 
postulates the appointment of two arbitrators – one repre senting the family 
of the husband, and the other the family of the wife.  The arbitrators are 
mandated to explore the possibility of reconciliation.   In case reconciliation 
is not possible, dissolution is advised, without publi city or mud-throwing or 
by  resorting to trickery or deception.  ‘Verse’ 128 provi des for divorce at the 
instance of the wife – ‘khula’.  It provides for a situ ation where, the wife 
fears cruelty or desertion on her husband’s part.  I n such a situation, her 
desire to seek an amicable settlement, cannot be treated  as an aspersion on 
her. The couple must then settle to separate, on most am icable terms.  The 
husband is cautioned not to be greedy.  He is require d to protect the wife’s 
economic interest.  In case of disputation between the couple, for economic 
reasons, the Quran ordains, that sanctity of the marria ge itself, is far 
greater than any economic interest, and accordingly s uggests, that if 
separation can be prevented by providing some econom ic consideration to 
the wife, it is better for the husband to make such a con cession, than to 
endanger the future of the wife and children. 26 20. The last relevant ‘verses’ – 1 and 2, are containe d in ‘section’ 1 of 
‘sura’ – LXV.  The same are reproduced below: 
“1. Prophet! When ye 
Do divorce women, 
Divorce them at their 
Prescribed periods, 
And count (accurately) 
Their prescribed periods: 
And fear God your Lord: 
And turn them not out  
Of their houses, nor shall 
They (themselves) leave, 
Except in case they are 
Guilty of some open lewdness, 
Those are limits 
Set by God: and any 
Who transgresses the limits 
Of God, does verily  
Wrong his (own) soul: 
Thou knowest not if 
Perchance God will 
Bring about thereafter 
Some new situation. 
2. Thus when they fulfil 
Their term appointed,  
Either take them back 
On equitable terms 
Or part with them 
On equitable terms; 
And take for witness 
Two persons from among you, 
Endued with justice, 
And establish the evidence  
(As) before God.  Such 
Is the admonition given  
To him who believes 
In God and the Last Day. 
And for those who fear 
God, He (ever) prepares 
A way out,” 
 
‘Verse’ 1 above, it may be noticed, has reference to th e Prophet Muhammad 
himself.  It is addressed in his capacity as teacher and representative of the 
community.  It endorses the view, that of all things pe rmitted, divorce is the 27 most hateful in the sight of the God.  Even though, the ‘verse’ provides for 
divorce, it proscribes the husband from turning out his  wife/wives from his 
house.  It also forbids the wife/wives, to leave the ho use of their husband, 
except when they are guilty.  Those who transgress the above limitation, are 
cautioned, that they are committing wrong to their own so uls.  
Reconciliation is suggested, whenever it is possible.  It is recommended at 
every stage.  The first serious difference between the  spouses is first to be 
submitted to a family counsel, on which both sides are  to be represented.   
The ‘verse’ requires the divorce to be pronounced, on ly after the period of 
prohibitory waiting.  ‘Dower’ has to be paid, and due  provisions have to be 
made, by the husband, for many things on equitable ter ms.  On each 
aspect, there is to be consideration. Reconciliation is recommended till the 
last moment.  The message contained in ‘verse’ 2 is, th at everything should 
be done fairly, and all interests should be safeguard ed.  It is ordained, that 
the parties should remember, that such matters affect the most intimate 
aspect of their lives, and therefore, have a bearing e ven in the spiritual 
kingdom.  It is therefore, that the ‘verses’ extracted ab ove, impress on the 
parties, to fear God, and ensure that their determination  is just and true. 
21. The understanding of the ‘verses’ of the Quran, i s imperative in this 
case, because the petitioner and those supporting the petitoner’s case 
contend inter alia , that ‘talaq-e-biddat’, is not in conformity with the 
unambiguous edicts of the Quran, and therefore, canno t be considered as 
valid constituents of Muslim ‘personal law’. 28 Part-4.  
Legislation in India, in the field of Muslim ‘person al law’: 
22. It would be relevant to record, that ‘personal law’ dealing with the 
affairs of those professing the Muslim religion, was also regulated by 
custom or usage.  It was also regulated by ‘Shariat’ –  the Muslim ‘personal 
law’.  The status of Muslim women under customs and us ages adopted by 
Muslims, were considered to be oppressive towards wom en.  Prior to the 
independence of India, Muslim women organisations co ndemned customary 
law, as it adversely affected their rights, under the ‘Shariat’.  Muslim women 
claimed, that the Muslim ‘personal law’ be made applic able to them.  It is 
therefore, that the Muslim Personal Law (Sharait) Appli cation Act, 1937 
(hereinafter referred to, as the Shariat Act), was pas sed.  It is essential to 
understand, the background which resulted in the enactm ent of the Shariat 
Act.  The same is recorded in the statement of objects a nd reasons, which is 
reproduced below: 
“For several years past it has been the cherished desi re of the Muslims of 
British India that Customary Law should in no case take  the place of 
Muslim Personal Law . The matter has been repeatedly agitated in the 
press as well as on the platform. The Jamiat-ul-Ulema -i-Hind, the 
greatest Moslem religious body has supported the deman d and invited 
the attention of all concerned to the urgent necessity of  introducing a 
measure to this effect . Customary Law is a misnomer inasmuch as it has 
not any sound basis to stand upon and is very much li able to frequent 
changes and cannot be expected to attain at any time in the future that 
certainty and definiteness which must be the characteris tic of all laws. 
The status of Muslim women under the so-called Customa ry Law is 
simply disgraceful. All the Muslim Women Organisatio ns have therefore 
condemned the Customary Law as it adversely affects thei r rights. They 
demand that the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) should b e made 
applicable to them. The introduction of Muslim Persona l Law will 
automatically raise them to the position to which they ar e naturally 
entitled . In addition to this present measure, if enacted, wou ld have very 
salutary effect on society because it would ensure cer tainty and 29 definiteness in the mutual rights and obligations of the  public. Muslim 
Personal Law (Shariat) exists in the form of a veritab le code and is too 
well known to admit of any doubt or to entail any great l abour in the 
shape of research, which is the chief feature of Custo mary Law.” 
 
23. Sections 2, 3 and 5 of the Shariat Act are releva nt and are extracted 
hereunder: 
“2. Application of personal law to Muslims.- Notwithsta nding any 
customs or usage to the contrary, in all questions  (save questions 
relating to agricultural land) regarding intestate succe ssion, special 
property of females, including personal property in herited or obtained 
under contract or gift or any other provision of Perso nal Law, marriage, 
dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zihar , lian, khula and 
mubaraat , maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trusts and trust 
properties, and wakfs (other than charities and charita ble institutions 
and charitable and religious endowments) the rule of d ecision in cases 
where the parties are Muslims shall be the Muslim Pers onal Law 
(Shariat).” 
3. Power to make a declaration.- (1) Any person who s atisfies the 
prescribed authority- 
(a) that he is a Muslim, and  
(b) that he is competent to contract within the meaning o f section 11 of 
the Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), and  
(c) that he is a resident of the territories to which thi s Act extends, 
may by declaration in the prescribed form and filed before the prescribed 
authority declare that he desires to obtain the benefit of  the provisions of 
this section, and thereafter the provisions of section 2  shall apply to the 
declarant and all his minor children and their descen dants as if in 
addition to the matters enumerated therein adoption, w ills and legacies 
were also specified. 
(2) Where the prescribed authority refuses to accept a declaration under 
sub-section (1), the person desiring to make the same may appeal to 
such officer as the Government may, by general or spe cial order, appoint 
in this behalf, and such officer may, if he is satis fied that the appellant is 
entitled to make the declaration, order the prescribed au thority to accept 
the same. 
 xxx  xxx  xxx 
5. Dissolution of marriage by Court in certain circu mstances.-The 
District Judge may, on petition made by a Muslim marrie d woman, 
dissolve a marriage on any ground recognized by Mus lim Personal Law 
(Shariat).” 
 
A close examination of Section 2, extracted above, lea ves no room for any 
doubt, that custom and usage, as it existed amongst Musli ms, were sought 30 to be expressly done away with, to the extent the same w ere contrary to 
Muslim ‘personal law’.  Section 2 also mandated, that M uslim ‘personal law’ 
(Shariat) would be exclusively adopted as “… the rul e of decision …” in 
matters of intestate succession, special property of fe males, including all 
questions pertaining to “… personal property inherite d or obtained under 
contract or gift or any other provision of ‘personal la w’, marriage, 
dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zihar , lian, khula and 
mubaraat, maintenance, dower, gifts, trusts and trust pro perties, and wakfs 
…”.  Section 3 added to the above list, “… adoption, wi lls and legacies …”, 
subject to the declaration expressed in Section 3. 
24. It is relevant to highlight herein, that under Section  5 of the Shariat 
Act provided, that a Muslim woman could seek dissolutio n of her marriage, 
on the grounds recognized under the Muslim ‘personal  law’.  It would also 
be relevant to highlight, that Section 5 of the Shariat Ac t was deleted, and 
replaced by the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939.   
25. In the above context, it would be relevant to menti on, that there was 
no provision in the Hanafi Code, of Muslim law for a married Muslim 
woman, to seek dissolution of marriage, as of right.  Accordingly, Hanafi 
jurists had laid down, that in cases in which the appl ication of Hanafi law 
caused hardship, it was permissible to apply the princ iples of the Maliki, 
Shafii or Hanbali law.  This position was duly notic ed in the introduction to 
the 1939 Act, as well as, in the statement of its objects and reasons.  Be 
that as it may, the alternatives suggested by the Hanafi jurists were not 
being applied by courts.  Accordingly, in order to c rystalise the grounds of 31 dissolution of marriage, by a Muslim woman, the 193 9 Act, was enacted.  
The statement of objects and reasons of the above enactm ent is relevant, 
and is accordingly extracted hereunder: 
“There is no proviso in the Hanafi Code of Muslim L aw enabling a 
married Muslim woman to obtain a decree from the Cour t dissolving her 
marriage in case the husband neglects to maintain her,  makes her life 
miserable by deserting or persistently maltreating her or absconds 
leaving her unprovided for and under certain other ci rcumstances. 
The absence of such a provision has entailed unspeak able misery to 
innumerable Muslim women in British India. The Hanaf i Jurists 
however, have clearly laid down that in cases in whic h the application of 
Hanafi Law causes hardship, it is permissible to appl y the provisions of 
the “Maliki, Shafii or Hambali Law”. 
Acting on this principle the Ulemas have issued fatwa s to the effect that 
in cases enumerated in clause 3, Part A of this Bill (now see section 2 of 
the Act), a married Muslim woman may obtain a decree d issolving her 
marriage. A lucid exposition of this principle can be  found in the book 
called “Heelatun Najeza” published by Maulana Ashraf  Ali Sahib who has 
made an exhaustive study of the provisions of Maliki L aw which under 
the circumstances prevailing in India may be applied to such cases.  This 
has been approved by a large number of Ulemas who h ave put their seals 
of approval on the book. 
As the Courts are sure to hesitate to apply the Maliki L aw to the case of a 
Muslim woman, legislation recognizing and enforcing the above 
mentioned principle is called for in order to relieve  the sufferings of 
countless Muslim women. 
One more point remains in connection with the dissolut ion of marriages.  
It is this.  The Courts in British India have held in a number of cases 
that the apostasy of a married Muslim woman ipso facto dissolves her 
marriage. This view has been repeatedly challenged at the bar, but the 
Courts continue to stick to precedents created by rul ings based on an 
erroneous view of the Muslim Law.  The Ulemas have i ssued Fatwas 
supporting non-dissolution of marriage by reason of wife’s apostasy.  The 
Muslim community has, again and again, given expres sion to its 
supreme dissatisfaction with the view held by the Courts .  Any number 
of articles have been appearing in the press demandin g legislation to 
rectify the mistake committed by the Courts; hence clause 5 (now see 
section 4) is proposed to be incorporated in this Bill . 
Thus, by this Bill the whole Law relating to dissolution  of marriages is 
brought at one place and consolidated in the hope that it would supply a 
very long felt want of the Muslim Community in India”. 32 26. The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 pr ovided, the 
grounds on which a Muslim woman, could seek dissolu tion of marriage.  
Section 2 of the enactment is reproduced below: 
“2. Grounds for decree for dissolution of marriage.— A woman married 
under Muslim law shall be entitled to obtain a decree f or the dissolution 
of her marriage on any one or more of the following grounds, namely:—  
(i) that the whereabouts of the husband have not been k nown for a 
period of four years;  
(ii) that the husband has neglected or has failed to p rovide for her 
maintenance for a period of two years; 
(iii) that the husband has been sentenced to imprison ment for a period of 
seven years or upwards;  
(iv) that the husband has failed to perform, without rea sonable cause, his 
marital obligations for a period of three years; 
(v) that the husband was impotent at the time of the marri age and 
continues to be so;  
(vi) that the husband has been insane for a period of  two years or is 
suffering from leprosy or virulent venereal disease;   
(vii) that she, having been given in marriage by her  father or other 
guardian before she attained the age of fifteen years,  repudiated the 
marriage before attaining the age of eighteen years:  
Provided that the marriage has not been consummated;  
(viii) that the husband treats her with cruelty, that is to say,—  
(a) habitually assaults her or makes her life misera ble by cruelty of 
conduct even if such conduct does not amount to physica l ill-treatment, 
or  
(b) associates with women of evil repute or leads an infamous life, or  
(c) attempts to force her to lead an immoral life, or  
(d) disposes of her property or prevents her exercis ing her legal rights 
over it, or  
(e) obstructs her in the observance of her religious profession or practice, 
or  
(f) if he has more wives than one, does not treat her e quitably in 
accordance with the injunctions of the Quran;  
(ix) on any other ground which is recognised as val id for the dissolution 
of marriages under Muslim law:  
Provided that— 
(a) no decree shall be passed on ground (iii) until the sentence has 
become final; 
(b) a decree passed on ground (i) shall not take effe ct for a period of six 
months from the date of such decree, and if the husba nd appears either 
in person or through an authorised agent within that per iod and satisfies 
the Court that he is prepared to perform his conjugal du ties, the Court 
shall set aside the said decree; and 33 (c) before passing a decree on ground (v) the Court shall, on application 
by the husband, make an order requiring the husband to satisfy the 
Court within a period of one year from the date of su ch order that he has 
ceased to be impotent, and if the husband so satisfies the Court within 
such period, no decree shall be passed on the said g round.” 
 
27. We may record here, that the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 
1939, is irrelevant for the present controversy on acco unt of the fact, that 
the issue in hand does not pertain to the dissolution of  marriage at the 
behest of a Muslim wife (but pertains to the dissolutio n of marriage, at the 
behest of a Muslim husband).  The provisions of the i nstant enactment are 
relevant, to understand the submissions advanced by  learned counsel, 
representing the petitioners, as also the respondents, ba sed on their 
individual perspectives. 
Part-5. 
Abrogation of the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ by legis lation, the world over, in  
Islamic, as well as, non-Islamic States : 
 
28. ‘Muslim Law in India and Abroad’, by Tahir Mahm ood and Saif 
Mahmood (Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2012 edition), 
records the following position about the abrogation of the practice of ‘talaq-
e-biddat’ as a means of divorce, through statutory ena ctments, the world 
over.  The countries which have abolished ‘talaq-e-b iddat’ have been divided 
into Arab States, Southeast Asian States, and Subcontinen tal States.  We 
have maintained the above classifications, in order to establish their factual 
positions.  Firstly, to demonstrate that the practice was p revalent across the 
globe in States having sizeable Muslim populations.  And secondly, that the 
practice has been done away with, by way of legislati on, in the countries 
referred to below. 34 A.  Laws of Arab States  
(i)  Algeria : Is a theocratic State, which declares Islam to be its official 
religion.  Muslims of the Sunni sect constitute its majo rity. On the issue in 
hand, it has enacted the following legislation:  
Code of Family Law 1984 
Law No.84-11 of 1984 as amended in 2005 
“Article 49. Divorce cannot be established except by a judgment of the 
court, preceded by an attempt at reconciliation for a period not exceeding 
three months.” 
 
(ii)  Egypt : Is a secular State. Muslims of the Sunni sect consti tute its 
majority.  On the issue in hand, it has enacted the fo llowing legislation: 
Law of Personal Status 1929 
Law 25 of 1929 as amended by Law 100 of 1985 
“Article 1. A Talaq pronounced under the effect of into xication or 
compulsion shall not be effective. 
Article 2. A conditional Talaq which is not meant to take  effect 
immediately shall have no effect if it is used as an i nducement to do 
some act or to abstain from it. 
Article 3. A Talaq accompanied by a number, expressl y or impliedly, shall 
not be effective except as a single revocable divorce . 
Article 4. Symbolic expressions of talaq, i.e., word s which may or may 
not bear the implication of a divorce, shall not effe ct a divorce unless the 
husband actually intended it.”  
 
(iii) Iraq : Is a theocratic State, which declares Islam to be its o fficial religion.  
The majority of Iraq’s Muslims is Shias.  On the iss ue in hand, it has 
enacted the following legislation: 
Code of Personal Status 1959 
Law 188 of 1959 as amended by Law 90 of 1987 
“Article 35.  No divorce shall be effective when pron ounced by the 
persons mentioned below: 
(a)  one who is intoxicated, insane or imbecile, und er duress, or not in 
his senses due to anger, sudden calamity, old age or  sickness; 
(b) a person in death-sickness or in a condition whic h in all probabilities 
is fatal and of which he actually dies, survived by h is wife.” 
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
Article 37. (1) Where a Talaq is coupled with a numb er, express or 
implied, not more than one divorce shall take place. 35 (2)  If a woman is divorced thrice on three separate  occasions by her 
husband, no revocation or remarriage would be permis sible after that. 
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
Article 39. (1) When a person intends to divorce his wife, he shall 
institute a suit in the Court of Personal Status requesting  that it be 
effected and that an order be issued therefor .  If a person cannot so 
approach the court, registration of the divorce in the c ourt during the 
period of Iddat shall be binding on him. 
(2)  The certificate of marriage shall remain valid till it is cancelled by the 
court.” 
 
(iv)  Jordan :  Is a secular State.  Muslims of the Sunni sect cons titute its 
majority.  On the issue in hand, it has enacted the fol lowing legislation: 
Code of Personal Status 1976 
Law 61 of 1976 
“Article 88. (1) Talaq shall not be effective if prono unced under 
intoxication, bewilderment, compulsion, mental disord er, depression or 
effect of sleep. 
(2) ‘Bewildered’ is one who has lost senses due to an ger or provocation, 
etc., and cannot understand what he is saying. 
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
Article 90. A divorce coupled with a number, expressl y or impliedly, as 
also a divorce repeated in the same sitting, will not  take effect except as a 
single divorce.  
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
Article 94. Every divorce shall be revocable except th e final third, one 
before consummation and one with consideration. 
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
Article 98. Where an irrevocable Talaq was pronounce d once or twice, 
renewal of marriage with the consent of parties is not p rohibited.” 
 
(v) Kuwait : Is a theocratic State, which declares Islam to be the official 
religion.  Muslims of the Sunni sect constitute its majo rity.  On the issue in 
hand, it has the following legislation in place: 
Code of Personal Status 1984 
Law 51 of 1984 
“Article 102. Talaq may be effected by major and san e men acting by 
their free will and understanding the implications of their action.  
Therefore Talaq shall not take effect if the husband is  mentally 
handicapped, imbecile, under coercion, mistake, intox ication, fear or 
high anger affecting his speech and action. 
   xxx   xxx   xxx 36 Article 109. If a Talaq is pronounced with a number ( two, three) by 
words, signs or writing, only one Talaq shall take ef fect .” 
 
(vi) Lebanon : Is a secular State.  Muslims constitute its majority,  which is 
estimated to be 54% (27% Shia, and 27% Sunni).  On th e issue in hand, it 
has enacted the following legislation: 
Family Rights Law 1962 
Law of 16 July 1962 
“Article 104. A divorce by a drunk person shall have  no effect. 
Article 105. A divorce pronounced under coercion sha ll have no effect.” 
 
(vii) Libya : Is a theocratic State, which declares Islam to be its official 
religion.  Muslims of the Sunni sect constitute its majo rity.  On the issue in 
hand, it has enacted the following legislation: 
Family Law 1984 
Law 10 of 1984 as amended by Law 15 of 1984 
“Article 28. Divorce is termination of the marriage bo nd.  No divorce will 
become effective in any case except by a decree of a competent court and 
subject to the provision of Article 30. 
Article 29. Divorce is of two kinds – revocable and irrevocable.  Revocable 
divorce does not terminate the marriage till the expiry of Iddat.  
Irrevocable divorce terminates the marriage forthwith.  
Article 30. All divorces shall be revocable except a third-time divorce, one 
before consummation of marriage, one for a consider ation, and those 
specified in this law to be irrevocable. 
Article 31. A divorce shall be effective only if pron ounced in clear words 
showing intention to dissolve the marriage.  Symbolic o r metaphorical 
expression will not dissolve the marriage. 
Article 32. A divorce pronounced by a minor or insan e person, or if 
pronounced under coercion, or with no clear intention to dissolve the 
marriage, shall have no legal effect. 
Article 33. (1) A divorce meant to be effect on some a ction or omission of 
the wife shall have no legal effect. 
(2) A divorce given with a view to binding the wife to  an oath or restrain 
her from doing something shall have no legal effect. 
(3) A divorce to which a number is attached, by expres s words or a 
gesture, shall effect only a single revocable divorce , except when it is 
pronounced for the third time . 
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
Article 35. The marriage may be dissolved by mutual consent of the 
parties.  Such a divorce must be registered with the cou rt.  If the parties 
cannot agree on the terms of such a divorce, they sha ll approach the 37 court and it will appoint arbitrators to settle the matter or reconcile 
them . 
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
Article 47. A divorce must be pronounced in a court an d in the presence 
of the other party or his or her representative.  The c ourt shall before 
giving effect to a divorce exhaust all possibilities of  reconciliation .” 
 
(viii) Morocco : Is a theocratic State, which declares Islam to be its o fficial 
religion.  Muslims of the Sunni sect constitute its majo rity.  On the issue in 
hand, it has enacted the following legislation: 
Code of Personal Status 2004 
Law 70.03 of 2004 
“Article 79. Whoever divorces his wife by Talaq must petition the court 
for permission to register it with the Public Notaries  of the area where the 
matrimonial home is situate, or where the wife resides , or where the 
marriage took place . 
Article 80. The petition will mention the identity of sp ouses, their 
professions, addresses, number of children, if any,  with their age, health 
condition and educational status.  It must be supporte d by a copy of the 
marriage agreement and a document stating the husband’s  social status 
and financial obligations. 
Article 81. The court shall summon the spouses and atte mpt 
reconciliation.  If the husband deliberately abstain s, this will be deemed 
to be withdrawal of the petition .  If the wife abstains, the court will notify 
her that if she does not present herself the petition may be decided in her 
absence.  If the husband has fraudulently given a wro ng address for the 
wife, he may be prosecuted at her instance. 
Article 82. The court will hear the parties and their wi tnesses in camera 
and take all possible steps to reconcile them, includi ng appointment of 
arbitrators or a family reconciliation council, and if  there are children 
such efforts shall be exhausted within thirty days .  If reconciliation takes 
place, a report will be filed with the court . 
Article 83. If reconciliation attempts fail, the court sha ll fix an amount to 
be deposited by the husband in the court within thirty days towards 
payment of the wife’s post-divorce dues and maintenanc e of children. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 90. No divorce is permissible for a person w ho is not in his senses 
or is under coercion or provocation. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 92. Multiple expressions of divorce, oral or written, shall have the 
effect of a single divorce only . 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 123. Every divorce pronounced by the husband shall be 
revocable, except a third-time divorce , divorce before consummation of 38 marriage, divorce by mutual consent, and divorce by Khula or Talaq-e-
Tafweez. 
 
(ix) Sudan : Is a theocratic State, which declares Islam to be its o fficial 
religion.  Muslims of the Sunni sect constitute its majo rity.  On the issue in 
hand, it has the following legislation in place: 
Law on Talaq 1935 
Judicial Proclamation No.4 of 1935 
“Article 1. A divorce uttered in a state of intoxicatio n or under duress 
shall be invalid and ineffective. 
Article 2. A contingent divorce which is not meant to be effective 
immediately and is used as an inducement or threat shal l have not 
effect. 
Article 3. A formula of divorce coupled with a numbe r, expressly or 
impliedly, shall effect only one divorce . 
Article 4. Metaphorical expressions used for a divorc e shall have the 
effect of dissolving the marriage only if the husband  actually meant a 
divorce.” 
 
(x) Syria : Is a secular State.  Muslims of the Sunni sect const itute its 
majority.  On the issue in hand, it has enacted the fol lowing legislation: 
Code of Personal Status 1953 
Law 59 of 1953 as amended by Law 34 of 1975 
“Article 89. No divorce shall take place when the man is drunk, out of his 
senses, or under duress.  A person is out of his sen ses when due to 
anger, etc. he does not appreciate what he says. 
Article 90. A conditional divorce shall have no effec t if not actually 
intended and used only as an inducement to do or absta in from doing 
something or as an oath or persuasion. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 92. If a divorce is coupled with a number, e xpressly or impliedly, 
not more than one divorce shall take place . 
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
Article 94. Every divorce shall be revocable except a  third-time divorce, 
one before consummation, a divorce with a considerati on, and a divorce 
stated in this Code to be irrevocable. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 117. Where a person divorces his wife the cou rt may, if satisfied 
that he has arbitrarily done so without any reasonable cause and that as 
a result of the divorce the wife shall suffer damage a nd become destitute, 
give a decision, with due regard to the husband’s fin ancial condition and 
the amount of wife’s suffering, that he should pay her compensation not 
exceeding three years’ maintenance, in addition to m aintenance payable 39 during the period of Iddat.  It may be directed to be paid either in a lump 
sum or in instalments as the circumstances of a case ma y require. 
 
(xi) Tunisia : Is a theocratic State, which declares Islam to be its o fficial 
religion.  Muslims of the Sunni sect constitute its majo rity.  On the issue in 
hand, it has enacted the following legislation: 
Code of Personal Status 1956 
Law 13-8 of 1956 as amended by Law 7 of 1981 
“Article 31.(1) A decree of divorce shall be given: (i) with the mutual 
consent of the parties; or (ii) at the instance of either party on the ground 
of injury; or (iii) if the husband insists on divor ce or the wife demands it.  
The party causing material or mental injury by the fa ct of divorce under 
clauses (ii) and (iii) shall be directed to indemnif y the aggrieved spouse.  
(2) As regards the woman to be indemnified for mater ial injury in terms 
of money, the same shall be paid to her after the exp iry of Iddat and may 
be in the form of retention of the matrimonial home.  This indemnity will 
be subject to revision, increase or decrease in accor dance with the 
changes in the circumstances of the divorced wife unti l she is alive or 
until she changes her marital status by marrying again .  If the former 
husband dies, this indemnity will be a charge on his  estate and will have 
to be met by his heirs if they consent to it and will be  decided by the 
court if they disagree. They may pay her in a lump su m within one year 
from the former husband’s death the indemnity claimabl e by her.  
Article 32 (1) No divorce shall be decreed except aft er the court has made 
an overall inquiry into the causes of rift and failed  to effect reconciliation. 
(2) Where no reconciliation is possible the court shal l provide, even if not 
asked to, for all important matters relating to the reside nce of the 
spouses, maintenance and custody of children and mee ting the children, 
except when the parties specifically agree to forgo all  or any of these 
rights.  The court shall fix the maintenance on the ba sis of all those facts 
which it comes to know while attempting reconciliation.   All important 
matters shall be provided for in the decree, which sh all be non-
appealable but can be reviewed for making additional  provisions.  
(3) The court of first instance shall pass orders in th e matters of divorce 
and all concerning matters including the compensation money to which 
the divorced wife may be entitled after the expiry of I ddat.  The portions 
of the decree relating to custody, maintenance, compen sation, residence 
and right to visit children shall be executed immediat ely.” 
 
(xii) United Arab Emirates : Is a theocratic State, as the Federal Constitution 
declares Islam to be the official religion.  The Cons titution also provides for 
freedom of religion, in accordance with established c ustoms.  Muslims of 40 the Shia sect constitute its majority.  On the issue in hand, it has the 
following legislation in place: 
Law of Personal Status 2005 
Federal Law No.28 of 2005 
“Article 140(1).  If a husband divorces his wife aft er consummation of a 
valid marriage by his unilateral action and without an y move for divorce 
from her side, she will be entitled to compensation bes ides maintenance 
for Iddat.  The amount of compensation will be decided  with due regard 
to the means of the husband and the hardship suffered by the wife, but 
it shall not exceed the amount of one year’s maintenanc e payable in law 
to a woman of her status.  
(2) The Kazi may decree the compensation, to be paid a s a lump sum or 
in instalments, according to the husband’s ability to p ay.” 
  
(xiii) Yemen : Is a theocratic State, which declares Islam to be the o fficial 
religion.  Muslims of the Sunni sect constitute its majo rity.  On the issue in 
hand, it has the following legislation in place: 
Decree on Personal Status 1992  
Decree 20 of 1992 
“Article 61. A divorce shall not be effective if prono unced by a man who is 
drunk, or has lost his senses, or has no power of d iscernment, if this is 
shown by his condition and action. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 64. A divorce to which a number is attached, wh atever be the 
number, will effect only a single revocable divorce . 
Article 65. The words saying that if the wife did or fa iled to do something 
she will stand divorced will not effect a divorce. 
Article 66. The words that if an oath or vow is broke n it will effect a 
divorce will not dissolve the marriage even if the sai d oath or vow is 
broken.  
Article 67. A divorce can be revoked by the husband d uring the Iddat 
period.  After the expiry of Iddat, a direct remarriage  between them will 
be lawful. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 71. If a man arbitrarily divorces his wife wi thout any reasonable 
ground and it causes hardship to her, the court may gr ant her 
compensation payable by the husband not exceeding mai ntenance for 
one year in accordance with her status.  The court may decide if the 
compensation will be paid as a lump sum or in instalm ents.” 41 B.  Laws of Southeast Asian States  
(i) Indonesia :  The Constitution of Indonesia guarantees freedom o f religion 
among Indonesians.  However, the Government recognize s only six official 
religions – Islam, Protestantism, Catholicism, Hinduism , Buddhism, and 
Confucianism.  Muslims of the Sunni sect constitute its m ajority.  On the 
issue in hand, it has the following legislation in pl ace: 
(a) Law of Marriage 1974 
Law 1 of 1974 
“Article 38. A divorce shall be effected only in the  court and the court 
shall not permit a divorce before attempting reconcili ation between the 
parties.  Divorce shall be permissible only for suff icient reasons 
indicating breakdown of marriage. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 41. In the event of a divorce both the parents s hall continue to be 
responsible for the maintenance of their children. As  regards custody of 
children, in case of a dispute between them the court s hall take a 
decision.  Expenses of maintenance and education shal l be primarily the 
father’s liability, but if he is unable to discharge th is liability the court 
may transfer it to the mother.  The court may also direct the former 
husband to pay alimony to the divorced wife.” 
(b) Marriage Regulations 1975 
Regulation 9 of 1975 
“Article 14. A man married under Islamic law wanting  to divorce his wife 
shall by a letter notify his intention to the District Co urt seeking 
proceedings for that purpose.  
Article 15. On receiving a letter the court shall, with in thirty days, 
summon the parties and gather from them all relevant fac ts. 
Article 16. If the court is satisfied of the existence of  any of the grounds 
mentioned in Article 19 below and is convinced that no reconciliation 
between the parties is possible it will allow a divorc e. 
Article 17. Immediately after allowing a divorce as laid down in Article 16 
above the court shall issue a certificate of divorce an d send it to the 
Registrar for registration of the divorce. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 19. A divorce may be allowed on the petition of  either party if the 
other party: 
(a) has committed adultery or become addict to alcohol, drugs, gambling 
or another serious vice; 
(b) has deserted the aggrieved party for two years o r more without any 
legal ground and against the said party’s will;  
(c) has been imprisoned for at least five years; 
(d) has treated the aggrieved party with cruelty of an  injurious nature; 42 (e) has been suffering from a physical deformity af fecting conjugal duties, 
or where relations between the spouses have become too  much strained 
making reconciliation impossible.” 
 
(ii) Malaysia : Under the Constitution of Malaysia, Islam is the offi cial 
religion of the country, but other religions are permitt ed to be practiced in 
peace and harmony.  Muslims of the Sunni sect constit ute its majority.  On 
the issue in hand, it has the following legislation in  place: 
Islamic Family Law Act 1984 
Act 304 of 1984 
“Article 47. (1) A husband or a wife who desires a d ivorce shall present 
an application for divorce to the court in the prescrib ed form 
accompanied by a statutory declaration containing  (a) particulars of the 
marriage and the name, ages and sex of the children, if any, of the 
marriage; (b) particulars of the facts giving the court jurisdiction under 
Section 45; (c) particulars of any previous matrimonia l proceedings 
between the parties, including the place of the proceed ings; (d) a 
statement as to the reasons for desiring divorce ; (e) a statement as to 
whether any, and if so, what steps have been taken to e ffect 
reconciliation ; (f) the terms of any agreement regarding maintenanc e and 
habitation of the wife and the children of the marriage , if any, and the 
division of any assets acquired through the joint effo rt of the parties, if 
any, or where no such agreement has been reached, the  applicant’s 
proposals regarding those matters; and (g) particular s of the order 
sought.  
(2) Upon receiving an application for divorce, the co urt shall cause 
summons to be served on the other party together with a copy of the 
application and the statutory declaration made by the app licant, and the 
summons shall direct the other party to appear before t he court so as to 
enable it to inquire whether or not the other party cons ents to the 
divorce .  
(3) If the other party consents to the divorce and the court is satisfied 
after due inquiry and investigation that the marriage ha s irretrievably 
broken down, the court shall advise the husband to pr onounce one Talaq 
before the court. 
(4) The court shall record the fact of the pronouncemen t of one Talaq and 
shall send a certified copy of the record to the appro priate Registrar and 
to the Chief Registrar for registration . 
(5) Where the other party does not consent to the divorce  or it appears to 
the court that there is reasonable possibility of a reco nciliation between 
the parties, the court shall as soon as possible appoin t a Conciliatory 
Committee consisting of a religious officer as Chairm an and two other 
persons, one to act for the husband and the other for th e wife, and refer 
the case to the Committee . 43 (6) In appointing the two persons under sub-section (5) the court shall, 
where possible, give preference to close relatives of  the parties having 
knowledge of the circumstances of the case. 
(7) The court may give directions to the Conciliatory C ommittee as to the 
conduct of the conciliation and it shall conduct it in accordance with 
such directions.  
(8) If the Committee is unable to agree or if the court is not satisfied with 
its conduct of the conciliation, the court may remove the  Committee and 
appoint another Committee in its place. 
(9) The Committee shall endeavour to effect reconciliati on within a period 
of six months from the date of its being constituted o r such further 
period as may be allowed by the court. 
(10) The Committee shall require the attendance of the p arties and shall 
give each of them an opportunity of being heard and may hear such 
other persons and make such inquiries as it thinks fit and may, if it 
considers it necessary, adjourn its proceedings from time to time.  
(11) If the Conciliatory Committee is unable to effect reconciliation and is 
unable to persuade the parties to resume their conjugal relationship, it 
shall issue a certificate to that effect and may append to the certificate 
such recommendations as it thinks fit regarding maintena nce and 
custody of the minor children of the marriage, if any,  regarding division 
of property and other matters related to the marriage.   
(12) No advocate and solicitor shall appear or act for  any party in any 
proceeding before a Conciliatory Committee and no par ty shall be 
represented by any person other than a member of his or her family 
without the leave of the Conciliatory Committee. 
(13) Where the Committee reports to the court that reconcili ation has 
been effected and the parties have resumed their conju gal relationship, 
the court shall dismiss the application for divorce.  
(14) Where the Committee submits to the court a certific ate that it is 
unable to effect reconciliation and to persuade the pa rties to resume the 
conjugal relationship, the court shall advise the husb and to pronounce 
one Talaq before the court, and where the court is unab le to procure the 
presence of the husband before the court to pronounce one Talaq, or 
where the husband refuses to pronounce one Talaq, the court shall refer 
the case to the Hakams [arbitrators] for action according  to section 48 . 
(15) The requirement of sub-section (5) as to referen ce to a Conciliatory 
Committee shall not apply in any case (a) where the app licant alleges 
that he or she has been deserted by an does not know th e whereabouts 
of the other party; (b) where the other party is residi ng outside West 
Malaysia and it is unlikely that he or she will be with in the jurisdiction of 
the court within six months after the date of the applic ation; (c) where 
the other party is imprisoned for a term of three year s or more; (d) where 
the applicant alleges that the other party is suffering from incurable 
mental illness; or (e) where the court is satisfied th at there are 
exceptional circumstances which make reference to a C onciliatory 
Committee impracticable. 44 (16) Save as provided in sub-section (17), a Talaq p ronounced by the 
husband or an order made by the court shall not be eff ective until the 
expiry of the Iddat . 
(17) If the wife is pregnant at the time the Talaq is pro nounced or the 
order is made, the Talaq or the order shall not be e ffective until the 
pregnancy ends .” 
 
(iii) Philippines :  Is a secular State.  Christians constitute its major ity.  On 
the issue in hand, it has the following legislation in  place: 
Code of Muslim Personal Law 1977 
Decree No.1083 of 1977 
“Article 46. (1) A divorce by Talaq may be effected by the husband in a 
single repudiation of his wife during her Tuhr [non- menstrual period] 
within which he has totally abstained from carnal rela tions with her.  
(2) Any number of repudiations made during one Tuhr [non-menstrual 
period] shall constitute only one repudiation and shal l become 
irrevocable after the expiration of the prescribed Idd at . 
(3) A husband who repudiates his wife, either for the first or second time, 
shall have the right to take her back within the Iddat pe riod by 
resumption of cohabitation without need of a new contract of marriage.  
Should he fail to do so, the repudiation shall become irrevocable . 
   xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 85. Within seven days after the revocation of a  divorce the 
husband shall, with the wife’s consent, send a stateme nt thereof to the 
Circuit Registrar in whose records the divorce was pre viously entered.  
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Article 161. (1) A Muslim male who has pronounced a Talaq shall, 
without delay, file with the Clerk of the Sharia Ci rcuit Court of the place 
where his family resides a written notice of such fact and the 
circumstances attending thereto, after having served a  copy to the wife 
concerned.  The Talaq pronounced shall not become ir revocable until 
after the expiration of the prescribed Iddat .  
(2) Within seven days from receipt of notice the Clerk  of the Court shall 
require each of the parties to nominate a representative.   The 
representatives shall be appointed by the court to consti tute, with the 
Clerk of the Court as Chairman, an Agama [religious s cholars] 
Arbitration Council which shall try and submit to the c ourt a report on 
the result of arbitration on the basis of which, and suc h other evidence 
as may be allowed, the court will pass an order .  
(3) The provisions of this Article will be observed  if the wife exercises 
right to Talaq-e-Tafweez. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 45 Article 183. A person who fails to comply with the req uirements of Article 
85, 161 and 162 of this Code shall be penalized by i mprisonment or a 
fine of two hundred to two thousand Pesos, or both .” 
 
C.  Laws of Sub-continental States  
 
(i) Pakistan & Bangladesh : Are both theocratic States, wherein Islam is the 
official religion.  In both countries Muslims of the Sunni sect constitute the 
majority.  On the issue in hand, it has the following legislation in place: 
Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 
Ordinance VIII of 1961 amended in Bangladesh by Ord inance 114 of 
1985 
(Bangladesh changes noted below relevant provisions) 
“Section 7. (1)  Any man who wishes to divorce his wi fe shall, as soon as 
may be after the pronouncement of Talaq in any form w hatsoever, give 
the Chairman a notice in writing of his having done s o, and shall supply 
a copy thereof to the wife . 
(2) Whoever contravenes the provision of sub-section (1) shall be 
punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousa nd rupees, or with 
both . 
[Bangladesh: ten thousand taka] 
(3) Save as provided in sub-section (5), a Talaq unl ess revoked earlier, 
expressly or otherwise, shall not be effective until th e expiration of ninety 
days from the day on which notice under subsection (1)  is delivered to 
the Chairman.  
(4) Within thirty days of the receipt of notice under s ub-section (1) the 
Chairman shall constitute an Arbitration Council for th e purpose of 
bringing about reconciliation between the parties, and  the Arbitration 
council shall take all steps necessary to bring about s uch reconciliation . 
(5) If the wife be pregnant at the time Talaq is prono unced, Talaq shall 
not be effective until the period mentioned in sub-sectio n (3) or of 
pregnancy, whichever is later, ends . 
(6) Nothing shall debar a wife whose marriage has be en terminated by 
Talaq effective under this section from re-marrying the  same husband 
without any intervening marriage with a third person,  unless such 
termination is for the third time so effective.” 
 
(ii) Sri Lanka : Is a secular State.  Buddhists constitute its majority.   On the 
issue in hand, it has the following legislation in pl ace: 
Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act 1951 
Act 6 of 1951 as amended by Act 40 of 2006 46 “Section 17 (4) Save as otherwise hereinafter express ly provided, every 
marriage contracted between Muslims after the commencem ent of this 
Act shall be registered, as hereinafter provided, im mediately upon the 
conclusion of the Nikah ceremony connected therewith. 
(5) In the case of each such marriage, the duty of ca using it to be 
registered is hereby imposed upon the following perso ns concerned in the 
marriage; (a) the bridegroom, (b) the guardian of th e bride, and (c) the 
person who conducted the Nikah ceremony connected wit h the marriage. 
Section 27. Where a husband desires to divorce his wi fe the procedure 
laid down in Schedule II shall be followed.” 
(2) Where a wife desires to effect a divorce from her  husband on any 
ground not referred to in sub-section (1), being a div orce of any 
description permitted to a wife by the Muslim law gover ning the sect to 
which the parties belong, the procedure laid down in  the Schedule III 
shall be followed so far as the nature of the divorce claimed in each case 
renders it possible or necessary to follow that procedu re. 
 
29. ‘Talaq-e-biddat’ is effective, the very moment it is  pronounced.  It is 
irrevocable when it is pronounced.   
Part-6. 
 
Judicial pronouncements, on the subject of ‘talaq-e -biddat’: 
30. Rashid Ahmad v. Anisa Khatun 1.  
(i) The facts : The primary issue that came to be adjudicated in the a bove 
case, pertained to the validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ pro nounced by Ghiyas-ud-
din, a Sunni Mohomedan of the Hanafi school, to his wife Anisa Khatun – 
respondent no.1.  The marriage of the respondent with Ghiyas-ud-din had 
taken place on 28.08.1905. Ghiyas-ud-din divorced he r on or about 
13.09.1905.  Ghiyas-ud-din pronounced triple talaq, i n the presence of 
witnesses, though in the absence of his wife – Anisa  Khatun.  Respondent 
no.1 – Anisa Khatun received Rs.1,000 in payment of ‘dower’ on the same 
day, which was confirmed by a registered receipt.  T hereafter, Ghiyas-ud-
din executed a ‘talaqnama’ (decree of divorce) dated  17.09.1905, which 
                                                 
1 AIR 1932 PC 25 47 narrates the divorce.  The ‘talaqnama’ is alleged to h ave been given to Anisa 
Khatun – respondent no.1. 
(ii)  The challenge : Anisa Khatun – respondent no.1, challenged the 
validity of the divorce, firstly, for the reason, that she was not present at the 
time of pronouncement of divorce.  And secondly, that e ven after the 
aforestated pronouncement, cohabitation had continued and subsisted for a 
further period of fifteen years, i.e., till the death o f Ghiyas-ud-din.  In the 
interregnum, five children were born to Ghiyas-ud-din  and Anisa Khatun.  
According to Anisa Khatun, Ghiyas-ud-din continued to treat Anisa Khatun 
– respondent no.1, as his wife, and the children bor n to her, as his 
legitimate children.  It was also the case of responden t no.1, that the 
payment of Rs.1,000, was a payment of prompt dower, an d as such, not 
payment in continuation of the ‘talaq-e-biddat’, pronou nced by Ghiyas-ud-
din.   
(iii) The consideration : While considering the validity of the ‘talaq-e-bidd at’ 
pronounced on 13.09.1905, and the legitimacy of the children born to Anisa 
Khatun, the Privy Council held as under: 
“15. Their Lordships are of opinion that the pronoun cement of the triple 
talak by Ghiyas-ud-din constituted an immediately eff ective divorce , and, 
while they are satisfied that the High Court were not justi fied in such a 
conclusion on the evidence in the present case, they a re of opinion that 
the validity and effectiveness of the divorce would no t be affected by 
Ghiyas-ud-din’s mental intention that it should not be a genuine divorce, 
as such a view is contrary to all authority. A talak a ctually pronounced 
under compulsion or in jest is valid and effective : Baillie’s Digest, 2nd 
edn., p. 208; Ameer Ali's Mohammedan Law, 3rd edn.,  vol. ii, p. 518; 
Hamilton's Hedaya, vol. i, p. 211. 
16. The respondents sought to found on the admitted fact that for about 
fifteen years after the divorce Ghiyas-ud-din treate d Anisa Fatima as his 
wife and his children as legitimate, and on certain ad missions of their 
status said to have been made by appellant No. 1 and r espondent pro 48 forma No. 10, who are brothers of Ghiyas-ud-din, but  once the divorce is 
held proved such facts could not undo its effect or con fer such a status 
on the respondents . 
17. While admitting that, upon divorce by the triple tala k, Ghiyas-ud-din 
could not lawfully remarry Anisa Fatima until she ha d married another 
and the latter had divorced her or died, the responden ts maintained that 
the acknowledgment of their legitimacy by Ghiyas-ud-din , subsequent to 
the divorce, raised the presumption that Anisa Fatima h ad in the interval 
married another, who had died or divorced her, and th at Ghiyas-ud-din 
had married her again, and that it was for the appella nts to displace that 
presumption. In support of this contention, they founded  on certain dicta 
in the judgment of this Board in Habibur Rahman Chowd hury v. Altaf Ali 
Chowdhury L.R. 48 I.A. 114. Their Lordships find it  difficult to regard 
this contention as a serious one, for these dicta directl y negative it. The 
passage relied on, which related to indirect proof of  Mahomedan 
marriage by acknowledgment of a son as a legitimate so n is as follows: “It 
must not be impossible upon the face of it, i.e., it mu st not be made 
when the ages are such that it is impossible in nature f or the 
acknowledgor to be the father of the acknowledgee, or w hen the mother 
spoken to in an acknowledgment, being the wife of anot her, or within 
prohibited degrees of the acknowledgor, it would be ap parent that the 
issue would be the issue of adultery or incest. The ac knowledgment may 
be repudiated by the acknowledgee. But if none of thes e objections occur, 
then the acknowledgment has more than evidential value. It raises a 
presumption of marriage – a presumption which may be taken advantage 
of either by a wife-claimant or a son-claimant. Being,  however, a 
presumption of fact, and not juris et de jure, it is, li ke every other 
presumption of fact capable of being set aside by contr ary proof. 
18. The legal bar to re-marriage created by the divor ce in the present 
case would equally prevent the raising of the presumpti on. If the 
respondents had proved the removal of that bar by provi ng the marriage 
of Anisa Fatima to another after the divorce and the de ath of the latter or 
his divorce of her prior to the birth of the children and their 
acknowledgment as legitimate, the respondents might then have had the 
benefit of the presumption, but not otherwise. 
19. Their Lordships are, therefore, of opinion that th e appeal should be 
allowed, that the decree of the High Court should be rev ersed, and that 
the decree of the Subordinate Judge should be restored,  the appellants 
to have the costs of his appeal and their costs in the Hi gh Court. Their 
Lordships will humbly advise His Majesty accordingl y.” 
 
(iv) The conclusion :  The Privy Council, upheld as valid, ‘talaq-e-bidd at’ – 
triple talaq, pronounced by the husband, in the absenc e and without the 
knowledge of the wife, even though the husband and wif e continued to 49 cohabit for 15 long years thereafter, wherefrom 5 off springs were born to 
them 
31.  Jiauddin Ahmed v. Anwara Begum 2, (Single Judge judgment, 
authored by Baharul Islam, J., as he then was ).  
 
(i) The facts : The respondent – Anwara Begum had petitioned for 
maintenance, under Section 125 of the Code of Crimi nal Procedure.  Her 
contention was, that she had lived with her husband  for about 9 months, 
after her marriage.  During that period, her marria ge was consummated.  
Anwara Begum alleged, that after the above period, her husband began to 
torture her, and even used to beat her.  It was the refore, that she was 
compelled to leave his company, and start living wi th her father, who was 
a day labourer.  Maintenance was duly granted, by t he First Class 
Magistrate, Tinsukia.  Her husband, the petitioner – Jiauddin Ahmed, 
contested the respondent’s claim for maintenance, b efore the Gauhati 
High Court, on the ground that he had divorced her,  by pronouncing 
divorce by adopting the procedure of ‘talaq-e-bidda t’.    
(iii) The challenge : It is in the above circumstances, that the validi ty of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’, and the wife’s entitlement to mai ntenance came to be 
considered by the Guahati High Court, which examine d the validity of the 
concept of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  
(iv) The consideration : (a) The High Court placed reliance on ‘verses’ 12 8 
to 130, contained in ‘section’ 19, of ‘sura’ IV, an d ‘verses’ 229 to 232, 
contained in ‘sections’ 29 and 30 of ‘sura’ II, and  thereupon, referred to 
the commentary on the above verses by scholars (Abd ullah Yusuf Ali and 
                                                 
2 (1981) 1 Gau.L.R. 358 50 Maulana Mohammad Ali) and the views of jurists (Ame er Ali and Fyzee), 
with pointed reference to ‘talaq’, which was narrat ed as under: 
“Islam tried to maintain the married state as far as pos sible, especially 
where children are concerned, but it is against the re striction of the 
liberty of men and women in such vitally important matte rs as love and 
family life. It will check hasty action as far as pos sible and leave the door 
to reconciliation open at many stages. Even after divo rce a suggestion of 
reconciliation is made, subject to certain precautions against thoughtless 
action. A period of waiting (Iddat) for three monthly co urses is 
prescribed, in order to see if the marriage conditiona lly dissolved is likely 
to result in issue. But this is not necessary where the divorced woman is 
a virgin. It is definitely declared that women and men  shall have similar 
rights against each other. 
Yusuf Ali has further observed: 
"Where divorce for mutual incompatibility is allowed,  there is danger that 
the parties might act hastily, then repent, and again wi sh to separate. To 
prevent such capricious action repeatedly, a limit is  prescribed. Two 
divorces (with a reconciliation between) are allowed .  After that the 
parties must unitedly make up their minds, either to diss olve their union 
permanently, or to live honourable lives together in mu tual love and for-
bearance to 'hold together on equitable terms, 'neither party worrying the 
other nor grumbling nor evading the duties and respons ibilities of 
marriage''. 
Yusuf Ali proceeds: 
"All the prohibitions and limits prescribed here are in the interests of 
good and honourable lives for both sides, and in the interests of a clean 
and honourable social life, without public or private scandals..." 
*    *   *   * 
"Two divorces followed by re-union are permissible;  the third time the 
divorce becomes irrevocable, until the woman marries  some other man 
and he divorces her. This is to set an almost imposs ible condition. The 
lesson is: if a man loves a woman he should not allo w a sudden gust of 
temper or anger to induce him to take hasty action... 
If the man takes back his wife after two divorces, he  must do so only on 
equitable terms, i.e. he must not put pressure on the wo man to prejudice 
her rights in any way, and they must live clean and h onourable lives, 
respecting each other's personalities..." 
The learned Commentator further observes : 
"The termination of a marriage bond is a most serious  matter for family 
and social life. An every lawful device is approved  which can equitably 
bring back those who have lived together, provided onl y there is mutual 
love and they can live on honourable terms with each other. If these 
conditions are fulfilled, it is no right for outside rs to prevent or hinder re-
union. They may be swayed by property or other cons iderations." 51 (b)  The High Court also placed reliance on ‘verse’ 35 contained in 
‘section’ 6, of ‘sura’ IV, and again referred to the c ommentary on the above 
‘verse’ (by Abdullah Yusuf Ali), who had interpreted  the same as under: 
"An excellent plan for settling family disputes, without t oo much 
publicity or mud-throwing, or resort to the chicanerie s of the law. The 
Latin countries recognise this plan in their legal syste m. It is a pity that 
Muslims do not resort to it universally, as they should.  The arbiters from 
each family would know the idiosyncrasies of both par ties, and would be 
able, with God's help, effect a real reconciliation." 
Maulana Mohammad Ali  has commented on the above verse thus: 
"This verse lays down the procedure to be adopted whe n a case for 
divorce arises. It is not for the husband to put away h is wife; it is the 
business of the judge to decide the case. Nor should th e divorce case be 
made too public. The Judge is required to appoint two arbitrators, one 
belonging to the wife's family and the other to the husb and's. These two 
arbitrators will find out the facts but their objective mu st be to effect a 
reconciliation between the parties. If all hopes of r econciliation fail, a 
divorce is allowed. But the final decision rests with  the judge who is 
legally entitled to pronounce a divorce. Cases were de cided in accordance 
with the directions contained in this verse in the early  days of Islam.” 
The same learned author commenting on the above verse  (IV: 35) in his 
the Religion of Islam has observed: 
"From what has been said above, it is clear that not onl y must there be a 
good cause for divorce, but that all means to effect rec onciliation must 
have been exhausted before resort is had to this extre me measure. The 
impression that a Muslim husband may put away his wif e at his mere 
caprice, is a grave distortion of the Islamic institut ion of divorce."  
Fyzee  denounces talaq as "absurd and unjust". Abdur Rahim sa ys: 
"I may remark that the interpretation of the law of divorc e by the jurists, 
specially of the Hanafi School, is one flagrant insta nce where because of 
literal adherence to mere words and a certain tendency  towards 
subtleties they have reached a result in direct antagoni sm to the 
admitted policy of the law on the subject." 
12. Mohammad Ali  has observed:- 
"Divorce is thus discouraged: 
'If you hate them (i.e. your wives) it may be that you d islike a thing while 
Allah has placed abundant good in it." Remedies are al so suggested to 
avoid divorce so long as possible: 
"And if you fear a breach between the two (i.e. the hu sband and the wife), 
then appoint a judge from his people and a judge from  her people; if they 
both desire agreement, Allah will effect harmony betw een them. 
It was due to such teachings of the Holy Quran that the Ho ly Prophet 
declared divorce to be the most hateful of all things permitted....The 
mentality of the Muslim is to face the difficulties of t he married life along 
with its comforts and to avoid disturbing the disruptio n of the family 52 relations as long as possible, turning to divorce onl y as a last resort."  
The learned author has further observed: 
"The principle of divorce spoken of in the Holy Qura n and which in fact 
includes to a greater or less extent all causes, is t he decision no longer to 
live together as husband and wife. In fact, marriage i tself is nothing but 
an agreement to live together as husband and wife and w hen either of 
the parties finds him or herself unable to agree to suc h a life, divorce 
must follow. It is not, of course, meant that every disa greement between 
them would lead to divorce; it is only the disagreemen t to live any more 
as husband and wife...” 
He then refers to the condition laid down in Sura IV ve rse 35. 
The learned author proceeds: 
"The 'shiqaq' or breach of the marriage agreement ma y also arise from 
the conduct of either party; for instance, if either of  them misconducts 
himself or herself, or either of them is consistently c ruel to the other, or, 
as may sometimes happen there is incompatibility of te mperament to 
such an extent that they cannot live together in marital a greement. 
The 'shiqaq' in these cases is more express, but still  it will depend upon 
the parties whether they can pull on or not. Divorce mus t always follow 
when one of the parties finds it impossible to continu e the marriage 
agreement and is compelled to break it off. At first si ght it may look like 
giving too much latitude to the parties to allow them to en d the marriage 
contract thus, even if there is no reason except incompa tibility of 
temperament, but this much is certain that if there is suc h disagreement 
that the husband and the wife cannot pull together, it is b etter for 
themselves, for their offspring and for society in ge neral that they should 
be separated than that they should be compelled to live  together. No 
home is worth the name wherein instead of peace there is wrangling; and 
marriage is meaningless if there is no spark of love  left between the 
husband and the wife. It is an error to suppose that suc h latitude tends 
to destroy the stability of marriage, because marriage  is entered into as a 
permanent and sacred relation based on love between a  man and a 
woman, and divorce is only a remedy when marriage f ails to fulfill its 
object.''  
With regard to the husband's right of pronouncing div orce the learned 
author has found; 
"Though the Holy Quran speaks of the divorce being p ronounced by the 
husband, yet a limitation is placed upon the exercise of this right." 
He then refers to the procedure laid down in Sura IV V erse 35 quoted 
above, and says : 
"It will be seen that in all disputes between the husband  and the wife, 
which it is feared will lead to a breach, two judges are to be appointed 
from the respective people of the two parties. These ju dges are required 
first to try to reconcile the parties to each other, failin g which divorce is 
to be effected. Therefore, though it is the husband who  pronounces the 
divorce, he is as much bound by the decision of the  judges, as is the 
wife. This shows that the husband cannot repudiate the m arriage at will. 
The case must first be referred to two judges and their  decision is 53 binding......The Holy Prophet is reported to have inte rfered and 
disallowed a divorce pronounced by a husband, restor ing the marital 
relations (Bu. 68: 2). It was no doubt matter of proced ure, but it shows 
that the authority constituted by law has the right to inte rfere in matters 
of divorce." 
The learned author has further observed: 
"Divorce may be given orally, or in writing, but it mus t take place in the 
presence of witnesses.” 
 
(iv) The conclusion :  Based on the Quranic verses referred to above, the  
High Court concluded as under: 
“13. A perusal of the Quranic verses quoted above and  the commentaries 
thereon by well-recognized Scholars of great eminence  like Mahammad 
Ali and Yusuf Ali and the pronouncements of great juri sts like Ameer Ali 
and Fyzee completely rule out the observation of Macna ghten that "there 
is no occasion for any particular cause for divorce,  and mere whim is 
sufficient", and the observation of Batchelor, J. (ILR 3 0 Bom. 537) that 
"the whimsical and capricious divorce by the husband i s good in law, 
though bad in theology". These observations have been b ased on the 
concept that women were chattal belonging to men, which the Holy 
Quran does not brook. Costello, J. In 59 Calcutta 833 h as not, with 
respect, laid down the correct law of talaq. In my vie w the correct law of 
talaq as ordained by the Holy Quran is that talaq must be  for a 
reasonable cause and be preceded by attempts at reconci liation between 
the husband and the wife by two arbiters-one from the wife's family the 
other from the husband's. If the attempts fail, talaq may  be effected. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
16. In the instant case the petitioner merely alleged in his written 
statement before the Magistrate that he had pronounced tala q to the 
opposite party; but he did not examine himself, nor h as he adduced any 
evidence worth the name to prove 'talaq'. There is no p roof of talaq, or its 
registration. Registration of marriage and divorce unde r the Assam 
Muslim Marriages and Divorces Registration Act, 1935 i s voluntary, and 
unilateral. Mere registration of divorce (or marriage ) even if proved, will 
not render valid divorce which is otherwise invalid under Muslim Law.” 
 
A perusal of the conclusion recorded by the High Co urt, through the 
above observations, leaves no room for any doubt, t hat the ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
pronounced by the husband without reasonable cause,  and without being 
preceded by attempts of reconciliation, and without  the involvement of 
arbitrators with due representation on behalf of th e husband and wife, 54 would not lead to a valid divorce.  The High Court also concluded, that the 
petitioner – Jiauddin Ahmed, had mainly alleged tha t he had pronounced 
talaq, but had not established the factum of divorc e by adducing any 
cogent evidence.  Having concluded, that the marria ge between the parties 
was subsisting, the High Court upheld the order awa rding maintenance to 
the wife – Anwara Begum. 
32. Must. Rukia Khatun v. Abdul Khalique Laskar 3, (Division Bench  
judgment, authored by Baharul Islam, CJ., as he the n was). 
(i) The facts : Rukia Khatun was married to Abdul Khalique Laskar .  The 
couple lived together for about 3 months, after the ir marriage.  During 
that period, the marriage was consummated. Rukia Kh atun alleged, that 
after the above period, her husband abandoned and n eglected her.  She 
was allegedly not provided with any maintenance, an d as such, had been 
living in penury, for a period of about 3 months, b efore she moved an 
application for grant of maintenance. The petitione r’s application for 
maintenance filed under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
was rejected by the Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistr ate, Hailakandi.  She 
challenged the order rejecting her claim of mainten ance, before the 
Gauhati High Court. The respondent-husband – Abdul Khalique Laskar, 
contested the claim for maintenance by asserting, t hat even though he 
had married the petitioner, but he had divorced her  on 12.4.1972 by way 
of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, and had thereafter even execute d a talaknama. The 
husband also asserted, that he had paid dower to the  petitioner.  The 
                                                 
3 (1981) 1 Gau. L.R. 375 55 claim of the petitioner-wife for maintenance was de clined on the ground, 
that she had been divorced by the respondent-husban d.   
(ii) The challenge : It is in the above circumstances, that the validi ty of 
the divorce pronounced by the respondent-husband, b y way of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’, and the wife’s entitlement to maintenance,  came up for 
consideration.   
(iii) The consideration : The Gauhati High Court recorded the following 
observations in respect of the validity of ‘talaq’ pronounced by the 
respondent-husband, on 12.4.1972. 
“7. The first point to be decided, therefore, is whether  the opposite party 
divorced the Petitioner. The equivalent of the word 'div orce' is 'talaq' in 
Muslim Law. What is valid 'talaq' in Muslim law was c onsidered by one of 
us (Baharul Islam, J. as he then was) sitting singly i n Criminal Revision 
No. 199/77 (supra). The word 'talaq' carries the lite ral significance of 
'freeing' or 'the undoing of knot'. 'Talaq' means div orce of a woman by her 
husband. Under the Muslim law marriage is a civil co ntract. Yet the 
rights and responsibilities consequent upon it are of  such importance to 
the welfare of the society that a high degree of sanctit y is attached to it. 
But in spite of the sacredness of the character of the ma rriagetic, Islam 
recognizes the necessity in exceptional circumstances of keeping the way 
open for its dissolution. 
There has been a good deal of misconception of the in stitution of 'talaq' 
under the Muslim law. From the Holy Quran and the Hadi s, it appears 
that though divorce was permitted, yet the right could be  exercised only 
under exceptional circumstances. The Holy Prophet is r eported to have 
said: "Never did Allah allow anything more hateful t o Him than “divorce.” 
According to a report of Ibn Umar, the Prophet said: "With Allah the most 
detestable of all things permitted is divorce". (See th e Religion of Islam by 
Maulana Muhammed Ali at page 671). 
In the case of Ahmed Kasim Molla v. Khatun Bibi repor ted in ILR Cal 
833, which has so long been regarded as a leading c ase on the law of 
divorce, Justice Costello held: 
“Upon that point (divorce), there are a number of author ities and I have 
carefully considered this point as dealt with in the very early authorities 
to see whether I am in agreement with the mere recent dec isions of the 
Courts. I regret that I have to come to the conclusion tha t at the law 
stands at present, any Mohamedan may divorce his wife at his mere 
whim and caprice.” 56 Following Macnaghten, J. who held: "there is no occasi on for any 
particular cause for divorce, and mere whim is suffi cient,'' and Batchelor, 
J, in case of Sarabai v. Babiabai (ILR 30 Bombay 53 7) Costello, J. held:— 
“It is good in law, though bad in theology.” 
Ameer Ali, in his Treatise on Mahomedan Law has obse rved: 
“The Prophet pronounced talaq to be a most destable thing  before the 
Almighty God of all permitted things. 
If 'talaq' is given without any reason it is stupidity  and ingratitude to 
God.” 
The learned Author in the same book has also observed  
“The author of the Multeka (Ibrohim Halebi) is more c oncise. He says-
‘The law gives to the man primarily the power of disso lving the marriage, 
if the wife, by her indocility or her bad character, renders the married life 
unhappy; but in the absence of serious reasons, no M usalman can 
justify a divorce either in the eyes of the religion or  the law. If he 
abandons his wife or put her away from simple capric e, he draws, upon 
himself the divine anger, for 'the curse of God', sai d the Prophet, 'rests on 
him who repudiates his wife capriciously.” 
In ILR Madras 22, a Division Bench of the Madras Hig h Court, consisting 
of Munro and Abdur Rahim, JJ., held: 
“No doubt an arbitrary or unreasonable exercise of the right to dissolve 
the marriage is strongly condemned in the Quran and in  the reported 
saying of the Prophet (Hadith) and is treated as a sp iritual offence. But 
the impropriety of the husband's conduct would in no w ay affect the legal 
validity of a divorce duly effected by the husband.”  
What Munro and Abdur Rahmim, JJ. in ILR 30 Madras 22  precisely held 
was that impropriety of the husband's conduct would in no way affect 
the legal validity of a divorce duly effected by the h usband. The emphasis 
was that a talaq would be valid only if it is effecte d in accordance with 
the Muslim Law. 
In ILR 5, Rangoon 18, their Lordships of the Privy Co uncil observed: 
“According to that law (the Muslim Law), a husband ca n effect a divorce 
whenever he desires.” 
But the Privy Council has not said that the divorce need  not be duly 
effected or that procedure enjoined by the Quran need  not be followed. 
8. It is needless to say that Holy Quran is the primary  source and is the 
weightiest authority on any subject under the Muslim Law . The Single 
Judge in Criminal Revision No. 199/77 in his judgme nt quoted the 
relevant verses of the Quran, to deal with divorce. W e need not refer to all 
the Verses. It will be sufficient if we refer to only o ne of them, which is 
Sura IV verse 35. It reads: 
“If ye fear a breach 
Between them twain, 
Appoint two arbiters 
One from his family, 
And the other from hers; 
If they wish for peace, 
God will cause 57 Their reconciliation: 
For God hath full knowledge, 
And is acquainted 
With all things.” 
From the verse quoted above, it appears that there is a  condition 
precedent which must be complied with before the talaq  is effected. The 
condition precedent if when the relationship between th e husband and 
the wife is strained and the husband intends to give ' talaq' to his wife he 
must chose an arbiter from his side and the wife an ar biter from her 
side, and the arbiters must attempt at reconciliation, with  a time gap so 
that the passions of the parties may call down and reco nciliation may be 
possible. If ultimately conciliation is not possible,  the husband will be 
entitled to give 'talaq'. The 'talaq' must be for good ca use and must not 
be at the mere desire, sweet will, whim and caprice of  the husband. It 
must not be secret. 
Maulana Mohammad Ali, an eminent Muslim jurist, in hi s Religion of 
Islam, after referring to, and considering, the rele vant verses on the 
subject has observed: 
From what has been said above, it is clear that not only  must there be a 
good cause for divorce, but that all means to effect rec onciliation must 
have been exhausted before resort is had to this extreme  measure. The 
impression that a Muslim husband may put away his wi fe at his mere 
caprice, is a grave distortion of the Islamic institut ion of divorce.” 
The learned Jurist also has observed: 
“Divorce must always follow when one of the parties fi nds it impossible to 
continue the marriage agreement and is compelled to bre ak it off.” 
9. Costello, J. in ILR 59 Calcutta 833 (supra) conside red the judgments 
of Munro and Abdur Rahim, JJ. in ILR 33 Mad. 22 (su pra) and of the 
Privy Council in ILR 5, Rangoon 18, (supra) but he p referred the opinions 
of Machaghten and Batchalor, JJ. in ILR 30 Bombay 537  (supra). The 
reason perhaps is, as observed by Krishna Ayer, J. (now of the Supreme 
Court) in the case of A. Yusuf Rowther v. Sowramma, r eported in AIR 
1971 Kerala 261: 
“Marginal distortions are inevitable when the Judicial  Committee in 
Downing Street has to interpret Manu and Muhammad of Ind ia and 
Arabia. The soul of a Culture law is largely the form alised and 
enforceable expression of a community's culture norm s-cannot be fully 
understood by alien minds.” 
10. Krishna Ayer, J., in AIR 1971 Kerala 261 (supra ) has further 
observed: 
“The view that the Muslim husband enjoys an arbitrary, unilateral power 
to inflict instant divorce does not accord with Islamic injunctions... 
Indeed, a deeper study of the subject disclosed a sur prisingly rational, 
realistic and modern law of divorce.... …..” 
The learned Judge has further observed: 
“It is a popular fallacy that a Muslim male enjoys, un der the Quranic 
law, Unbridled Authority to liquidate the marriage. Th e whole Quran 58 expressly forbids a man to seek pretexts for divorcin g his wife, so long as 
she remains faithful and obedient to him, 'if they (na mely, women) obey 
you, then do not seek a way against them' (Quran IV: 3 4)” 
 
(iv) The conclusion :  Based on the above consideration above, the High 
Court recorded the following conclusion: 
“11. In our opinion the correct law of 'talaq' as ord ained by Holy Quran 
is : (i) that 'talaq' must be for a reasonable cause; and  (ii) that it must be 
preceded by an attempt at reconciliation between the hu sband and wife 
by two arbiters, one chosen by the wife from her fami ly and the other by 
the husband from his. If their attempts fail, 'talaq' ma y be effected . In our 
opinion the Single Judge has correctly laid down the l aw in Criminal 
Revision No. 199/77 (supra), and, with respect the Cal cutta High Court 
in ILR 59 Calcutta 833 and the Bombay High Court in ILR  30 Bombay 
537 have not laid down the correct law.” 
A perusal of the consideration extracted above, whe n examined closely, 
reveals that the High Court listed the following es sential ingredients of a 
valid ‘talaq’ under Muslim law.  Firstly, ‘talaq’ h as to be based on good 
cause, and must not be at the mere desire, sweet wi ll, whim and caprice 
of the husband.  Secondly, it must not be secret.  Thirdly, between the 
pronouncement and finality, there must be a time ga p, so that the 
passions of the parties may calm down, and reconcil iation may be 
possible. Fourthly, there has to be a process of ar bitration (as a means of 
reconciliation), wherein the arbitrators are represen tatives of both the 
husband and the wife.  If the above ingredients do no t exist, ‘talaq’ – divorce 
would be invalid.  For the reason, that the ‘talaq-e-b iddat’ – triple talaq 
pronounced by the respondent-husband – Abdul Khaliqu e Laskar, did not 
satisfy all the ingredients for a valid divorce, the Hi gh Court concluded that 
the marriage was subsisting, and accordingly held the  wife to be entitled to 
maintenance. 59 33.  Masroor Ahmed v. State (NCT of Delhi)4, (Single Bench judgment, 
authored by Badar Durrez Ahmed, J., as he then was) . 
(i) The facts : Aisha Anjum was married to the petitioner – Masroor A hmed, 
on 02.04.2004.  The marriage was duly consummated an d a daughter was 
born to the couple (-on 22.10.2005).  It was alleged b y the wife – Aisha 
Anjum, that the husband’s family threw her out of her matrimonial home   
(-on 08.04.2005), on account of non-fulfilment of dow ry demands.  While 
the wife – Aisha Anjum was at her maternal home, the h usband – Masroor 
Ahmed filed a case for restitution of conjugal rights (-on 23.03.2006), before 
the Senior Civil Judge, Delhi.  During the course of the above proceedings, 
the wife returned to the matrimonial home, to the company  of her husband 
(-on 13.04.2006), whereupon, marital cohabitation was restored.  Once 
again there was discord between the couple, and Masr oor Ahmed 
pronounced ‘talaq-e-biddat’, on 28.08.2006.  The wife  – Aisha Anjum 
alleged, that she later came to know that her husband – Masroor Ahmed, 
had divorced her by exercising his right of ‘talaq-e- biddat’, in the presence 
of  the brothers of Aisha Anjum, in October 2006.  An d that, the husband 
had lied to the Court, (and to her, as well) when he had sought her 
restitution, from the Court, by making out as if the marr iage was still 
subsisting.  It was her claim, that she would not have  agreed to conjugal 
relations with him, had she known of the divorce.  An d therefore, her 
consent to have conjugal relations with Masroor Ahmed,  was based on 
fraud committed by him, on her – Aisha Anjum.  She the refore accused 
Masroor Ahmed, for having committed the offence under Section 376 of the 
                                                 
4 2008 (103)  DRJ 137 60 Indian Penal Code, i.e., the offence of rape.  She a lso claimed maintenance 
from her husband, under Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code.  
During the pendency of the above proceedings, the parti es arrived at an 
amicable settlement on 1.9.2007. 
(ii)  The challenge : The position expressed by the High Court in 
paragraph 12 of the judgment, crystalises the challenge .  Paragraph 12, is 
reproduced below: 
“12. Several questions impinging upon muslim law con cepts arise for 
consideration.  They are:- 
(1) What is the legality and effect of a triple talaq? 
(2) Does a talaq given in anger result in dissolution of marriage? 
(3) What is the effect of non-communication of the talaq to the wife? 
(4) Was the purported talaq of October 2005 valid? 
(5) What is the effect of the second nikah of 19.4.2006 ?” 
 
(iii) The consideration : While considering the legality and effect of ‘talaq -e-
biddat’, the High Court recorded the following consider ation: 
“Sanctity and effect of Talaq-e-bidaat or triple talaq. 
24. There is no difficulty with ahsan talaq or hasa n talaq. Both have legal 
recognition under all fiqh schools, sunni or shia. T he difficulty lies with 
triple talaq which is classed as bidaat (an innovation) .  Generally  
speaking,  the shia  schools  do  not recognise triple  talaq as bringing 
about a valid divorce 1. There is, however, difference of opinion even 
within the sunni schools as to whether the triple talaq  should be treated 
as three talaqs, irrevocably bringing to an end the ma rital relationship or 
as one rajai (revocable) talaq 2, operating in much the same way as an 
ahsan talaq .” 
                                                 
1 With regard to triple talaq, Fyzee comments: Such a  talaq is lawful, although sinful, in Hanafi law; b ut 
in Ithna 'Ashari and the Fatimid laws it is not per missible. p. 154. Ameer Ali notes: The Shiahs and t he 
Malikis do not recognise the validity of the talak- ul-bid'at, whilst the Hanafi and the Shaf'eis agree  in 
holding that a divorce is effective, if pronounced in the bid'at form, though in its commission the ma n 
incurs a sin . p. 435. These statements may not be accurate as t o the views of Malikis and Shaf'eis, but it 
is universally recognized that the above-mentioned Shi'a schools do not find triple talaq to be a vali d 
form of divorce. 
 
2 Classical Hanafi law, especially as it is practic ed in India, seems to take the opinion that triple talaq is 
sinful yet effective as an irrevocable divorce . See, e.g., Mulla p. 261-62; The Hedaya, p. 72-73,  83. On 61  
 
 (iv) The conclusion : Based 3 on 4 the 5 consideration recorded above, the High 
Court arrived at the following conclusions: 
“26. It is accepted by all schools of law that talaq-e- bidaat is sinful6. Yet 
some schools regard it as valid. Courts in India have  also held it to be 
                                                                                                                                            
the other hand, Ameer Ali suggests that a triple ta laq can be revoked within the iddat period. p. 436.  
Maulana 'Umar Ahmad ‘Usmani, in The Quran, Women an d Modern Society, by Asghar Ali Engineer, 
New Dawn: New Delhi (2005), states that Muhammad ib n Muqatil, a Hanafi jurist, gave evidence 
indicating that Imam Abu Hanifa developed a second opinion that a triple talaq constitutes one talaq a nd 
that it can therefore be revoked within the iddat p eriod. Maulana ‘Umar Ahmad ‘Usmani quotes from 
Fath al-Bari by Hafiz Ibn Jahar al-Asqalani, who st ates that many eminent jurists have held the opinio n 
that three talaqs pronounced in one sitting constit ute only one talaq. Maulana Wahiduddin Khan , in 
Concerning Divorce, Goodword Books: New Delhi (2003 ), p. 29, says that in the case of a man who was 
'emotionally overwrought' when pronouncing talaq th ree times, “His three utterances of the word talaq 
may be taken as an expression of the intensity of h is emotions and thus the equivalent of only one suc h 
utterance”. He further gives the example of a Hadit h recorded by Imam Abu Dawud in which Rukana ibn 
Abu Yazid said talaq to his wife three times in one  sitting, and then regretted his action. When he to ld the 
Prophet Muhammad  (peace be upon him) how he had divorced his wife, the Prophet  (pbuh) observed, 
“All three count as only one. If you want, you may revoke it .” p. 28-29 (original Hadith found in Musnad 
Ahmad ibn Hanbal). There is also a Hadith reported by Abdullah ibn Abbas that in the Prophet's (pbuh) 
lifetime, during the caliphate of Abu Bakr, and dur ing the first two years of Umar ibn al-Khattab's 
caliphate, triple talaq was counted as one talaq on ly, but that Umar then made triple talaq binding up on 
his people so that they learned the consequences of  their hasty actions . Sahih Muslim 3491. Maulana 
Wahiduddin Khan observes this rule was of a “tempor ary nature” and was specific to the people of the 
time, and that the 'ijma of the Companions on Umar' s decision was also temporary, as 'ijma cannot 
override the system of divorce prescribed in the Qu ran. p. 30, 32. He notes that the Shariah is eterna l, but 
that a Muslim ruler can make exceptions in special circumstances and can ensure that women affected by  
such a ruling are fully compensated. p. 30-31. He c oncludes that scholars today cannot justify enforci ng 
triple talaq by citing Umar's ruling because they d o not have the powers of a Caliph as Umar had . p. 32. 
It seems that modern Indian Hanafi scholars have ta ken this opinion as well: the Compendium of Islamic  
Laws, 2001, Part II, Section 24, states the followi ng: “If a person pronouncing talaq says that he int ended 
only a single talaq and repeated the words of talaq  only to put emphasis and these words were not mean t 
to pronounce more than one talaq, his statement on oath will be accepted” . Translated by Mahmood. 
(Also see: The Muslim Law of India, 3rd ed., Tahir Mahmood, Lexis Nexis Butterworths: New Delhi 
(2002),p.107, where the learned author noted: “In I ndia there has been no legislation in this regard, but 
the muftis of the time now agree that if a man pron ounces the so-called 'triple talaq' but later swear s that 
he did not mean it, his declaration may be given th e effect of a single talaq revocable during iddat a nd, if 
not so revoked, leaving room for a fresh nikah ther eafter with the wife's consent ”). Such a view is, 
perhaps, based upon an application of the following  legal maxim of Islamic law - Al-umuru bi-
maqasidiha: Acts are judged by the intention behind  them.  
Sheikh Sayyed Sabiq in Fiqh As-Sunnah states on the  subject of triple talak that although the majority  
opinion is that triple talak will count as three di vorces, other scholars such as Ibn Taymiyyah and Ib n al-
Qayyim, as well as Companions like 'Ata', Tawuus, I bn Dinar, 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, Ibn Mas'ud, 'Abdur-
Rahman ibn 'Awf, Az-Zubayr, were of the opinion tha t it counts as only one pronouncement of divorce. 
He then says, “This latter view is believed to be t he most correct.”  Some go as far as to argue that there 
is ijma 'that triple talak counts as three talaks. However, according to the requirements for ijma '(i n the 
Hanafi madhab), 'no opinion to the contrary should have been expressed on the question by any of the 
Companions, or by other Mujtahids before the format ion of the Ijma',” and “none of the Mujtahids takin g 
part in the decision should have afterwards changed  his opinion.” Abdur Rahim, p. 145. Here, the first  
condition is certainly not met, and the second is a rguably not met. Finally, many Muslim countries, 
including Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Sudan, S yria, and Yemen, have implemented laws that 
uphold the notion that a triple talak counts as onl y one talak. Personal Law in Islamic Countries, Tah ir 
Mahmood, Academy of Law and Religion: New Delhi (19 87). 
  3  4  
5  
6 See supra, fn 25 & 26, for the opinion of the Hanaf i madhab that triple talaq is sinful. 62 valid. The expression - bad in theology but valid in law - is often used in 
this context. The fact remains that it is considered to be sinful. It was 
deprecated by prophet Muhammad 7. It is definitely not recommended or 
even approved by any school. It is not even considere d to be a valid 
divorce by shia schools. There are views even among st the sunni schools 
that the triple talaq pronounced in one go would not be  regarded as three 
talaqs but only as one. Judicial notice can be taken o f the fact that the 
harsh abruptness of triple talaq has brought about extrem e misery to the 
divorced women and even to the men who are left with no  chance to 
undo the wrong or any scope to bring about a reconcil iation . It is an 
innovation which may have served a purpose at a partic ular point of time 
in history 8 but, if it is rooted out such a move would not be contr ary to 
any basic tenet of Islam or the Quran or any ruling of  the Prophet 
Muhammad . 
 
27. In this background, I would hold that a triple tala q (talaq-e-bidaat), 
even for sunni muslims be regarded as one revocable  talaq. This would 
enable the husband to have time to think and to have amp le opportunity 
to revoke the same during the iddat period . All this while, family 
members of the spouses could make sincere efforts at b ringing about a 
reconciliation . Moreover, even if the iddat period expires and the ta laq 
can no longer be revoked as a consequence of it, the estranged couple 
still has an opportunity to re-enter matrimony by contr acting a fresh 
nikah on fresh terms of mahr etc .” 
 
 
A perusal of the conclusions recorded by the High Cou rt would reveal, that 
triple talaq pronounced at the same time, is to be treated  as a single 
pronouncement of divorce. And therefore, for severing  matrimonial ties 
finally, the husband would have to complete the prescr ibed procedure, and 
thereafter, the parties would be treated as divorced.  
                                                                                                                                            
 
7 Once the Prophet (pbuh) was informed about a man wh o had pronounced three divorces at one time. He got  up in 
anger, saying, “Is sport being made of the Book of A llah while I am (yet) among you?” Reported by an-Nas ai'i. 
 
8 The exact Hadith is as follows: “Abdullah ibn Abbas  reported that the pronouncement of three divorces during the 
lifetime of Allah's Messenger (pbuh) and that of Ab u Bakr and two years of the caliphate of Umar was tr eated as 
one. But Umar ibn al-Khattab said, “Verily the peopl e have begun to hasten in the matter in which they are required 
to observe respite. So if we had imposed this upon them, [it would have deterred them from doing so!] and he 
imposed it upon them.” Sahih Muslim 3491.34. 1 234  Nazeer v. Shemeema 5, (Single Bench judgment, authored by A. 
Muhamed Mustaque, J.).  
 
(i) The facts :  Through the above judgment, the High Court disposed  of a 
number of writ petitions, including three writ petitions,  wherein husbands 
had terminated their matrimonial alliance with their spo uses, by 
pronouncing ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq.  Their mat rimonial relationship 
having come to an end, one or the other or both (-this p osition is unclear, 
from the judgment) spouses approached the passport autho rities, to delete 
the name of their former spouse, from their respective passports.  The 
passport authorities declined to accept their request, as  the same was 
based on private actions of the parties, which were onl y supported by 
unauthenticated ‘talaq-namas’ (deeds of divorce).  The  stance adopted by 
the passport authorities was, that in the absence of a fo rmal decree of 
divorce, the name of the spouse could not be deleted.  By passing interim 
directions, the High Court ordered the passport author ities, to correct the 
spouse details (as were sought), based on the admissio n of the 
corresponding spouse, that their matrimonial alliance had been dissolved. 
(ii) The challenge :  Even though the authenticity and/or the legality of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’, did not arise for consideration befor e the High Court, it 
noticed “….Though the issue related to triple talaq doe s not directly crop up 
in these writ petitions calling upon this Court to decid e the validity of triple 
talaq, this Court cannot ignore while granting a relief based on admission, 
the fact that direction of this Court would result in great er or lesser extent 
of injustice if it remains oblivious to the repercussi ons of the repudiation of 
                                                 
1  2  3  
4  5 2017 (1) KLT 300 64 marriage by volition of individual…..”.  The High Co urt therefore, embarked 
on the exercise of examining the validity of ‘talaq-e -biddat’. 
(iii) The consideration :  The High Court took into consideration texts by 
renowned scholars, as for instance, from “Sharia” by  Wael B. Hallaq, 
“Sharia Law, An Introduction” by Mohammad Hashim Kama li, “Qur’an: The 
Living Truth” by Basheer Ahmad Mohyidin, “Muslim Law  in India And 
Abroad” by Dr. Tahir Mahmood, “The Lawful and the P rohibited in Islam” by 
Sheikh Yusuf al-Qaradawi, from the Urdu book “Hikma tul Islam” by 
Moulana Wahidul Khan.  The High Court also took into consideration 
Quranic verses (all of which have been, extracted ab ove).  The High Court 
even took note of the two judgments of the Gauhati High  Court (referred to 
above), besides other High Court judgments, and thereup on, observed as 
under: 
“12. This case only symptomize the harsh realities en countered by 
women belonging to Muslim community, especially of the lower strata. It 
is a reminder to the court unless the plight of sufferer s is alleviated in a 
larger scheme through legislation by the State, justi ce will be a distant 
dream deflecting the promise of justice by the State "eq uality before the 
law". The State is constitutionally bound and committed to  respect the 
promise of dignity and equality before law and it ca nnot shirk its 
responsibility by remaining mute spectator of the malad y suffered by 
Muslim women in the name of religion and their inexor able quest for 
justice broke all the covenants of the divine law they p rofessed to 
denigrate the believer and faithful. Therefore, the re mainder of the 
judgment is a posit to the State and contribution for settl ement of the 
'legal vex' which remains unconcluded more than four  decades after this 
court's reminder in Mohamed Haneefas' case (supra). 
13. The State is constitutionally obliged to maintain co herent order in the 
society, foundation of which is laid by the family. T hus sustenance or 
purity of the marriage will lay a strong foundation f or the society, without 
which there would be neither civilisation nor progres s. My endeavour in 
this judgment would have been over with the laying of correct principles 
related to triple talaq in Qur'anic perspective to decla re the law and to 
decide the matter.  However, I find the dilemma in this context is not a 65 singular problem arisen demanding a resolution of the  dispute between 
the litigants by way of adjudication.  But rather it require a State 
intervention by way of legislation to regulate triple ta laq in India.  
Therefore, settlement of law relating to talaq is necessa ry and further 
discussion is to be treated as an allude for the State to consider for 
possible reforms of divorce Law of Muslim in this C ountry . The empirical 
research placed herein justifies such course of acti on to remind the State 
for action. It is to be noted, had the Muslim in India b een governed by 
the true Islamic law, Penal law would have acted as de liverance to 
sufferings of Muslim women in India to deter arbitrar y talaq in violation 
of Qur'anic injunction. 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
15. This takes me to the question why the State is so hes itant to reforms. 
It appears from public debate that resistance is from a  small section of 
Ulemas (scholars within the society) on the ground th at Sharia is 
immutable and any interference would amount to negation of freedom of 
religion guaranteed under the Constitution . I find this dilemma of Ulema 
is on a conjecture of repugnancy of divine law and s ecular law. The State 
also appears as reluctant on an assumption that reforms  of religious 
practice would offend religious freedom guaranteed un der the 
Constitution of India . This leads me to discuss on facets of Islamic law.  I 
also find it equally important to discuss about the refo rms of personal 
law relating to triple talaq within the constitutional pol ity, as the 
ultimately value of its legality has to be tested und er the freedom of 
religious practices.” 
 
(iv) The conclusion :  In the background of the above consideration, the High 
Court held as under: 
“The W.P.(C) 37436 of 2003 is filed by the husband a lleging that the 
triple talaq pronounced by him is not valid in accorda nce with Islamic 
law. Therefore, proceedings initiated before the Magi strate under Section 
3 of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce ) Act, 1986 and 
consequent order will have to be set aside. This case depicts the misuse 
of triple talaq, wife appears to have accepted the talaq  and moved the 
Magistrate court on a folly created by husband . There are innumerable 
cases as revealed from the empirical data referred in  the research in 
which neither party are aware of the procedure of tala q according to the 
personal law. This Court under Article 226 of the Cons titution of India is 
not expected to go into the disputed questions of fact. The entire exercise 
in this judgment is to alert the State that justice has beco me elusive to 
the Muslim woman and the remedy thereof lies in codifi cation of law of 
divorce . This court cannot grant any relief to the writ petitione r as the 
true application of the law to be considered in a given  facts is upon the 
Court trying the matter. It is for the subordinate court to  decide whether 
there was application of Islamic law in effecting div orce by triple talaq. 
Therefore, declining jurisdiction, this writ petition is  dismissed. 66  
W.P.(C) Nos. 25318 & 26373 of 2015 and 11438 of 201 6 
In these Writ Petitions question of validity of triple ta laq does not arise. 
However this question was considered in larger perspe ctive for the 
reason that if court grant any relief based on admiss ion of the parties as 
to the repudiation of marriage by triple talaaq, that woul d amount to 
recognition of a triple talaq effected not in accordan ce with law, as this 
court has no mechanism to find out the manner in which talaq is 
effected . The Court cannot become a party to a proceedings to r ecognise 
an ineffective divorce in the guise of directions bei ng given to passport 
authorities to accept the divorce. The legal effect of s uch divorce has to 
be probed by a fact finding authority in accordance w ith the true Islamic 
law. Stamp of approval being given by the court by ord ering passport 
authority to accept divorce effected not in accordance with the law, will 
create an impression that court transgressed its limits while directing a 
public authority to honour an act which was done not in  accordance 
with law . Though in these Writ Petitions, considering the urg ency of the 
matters, this court granted interim order directing the p assport 
authorities to act upon the request of the petitioners. Con sidering the 
large number of similar reliefs sought before this co urt in various Writ 
Petitions, this court is of the view that the issue can b e resolved only 
through a larger remedy of codification of law in the light of the 
discussion as above. In the light of interim order, these Writ Petitions are 
disposed of . 
 
Conclusion: 
Courts interpret law and evolve justice on such interpre tation of law. It is 
in the domain of the legislature to make law. Justice has become elusive 
for Muslim women in India not because of the religion  they profess, but 
on account of lack of legal formalism resulting in im munity from law . 
Law required to be aligned with justice. The search f or solution to this 
predicament lies in the hands of the law makers. It is  for the law makers 
to correlate law and social phenomena relating to div orce through the 
process of legislation to advance justice in institutio nalized form . It is 
imperative that to advance justice, law must be formulat ed without any 
repugnance to the religious freedom guaranteed under th e Constitution 
of India. It is for the State to consider the formulatio n of codified law to 
govern the matter. Therefore, I conclude by drawing a ttention of those 
who resist any form of reform of the divorce law of M uslim community in 
India to the following verses of Holy Quran . (Chapter 47:2) 
"And those who believe and do good works and believe in that which is 
revealed unto Muhammad - and it is the truth from their Lord-He riddeth 
them of their ill deeds and improveth their state ." 
"Thus we display the revelations for people who have sense " (Chapter 
30:28) 
The Registry shall forward the copy of this judgment to Union Law 
Ministry and Law Commission of India.” 67 A perusal of the conclusions drawn by the High Court r eveals, that the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, was deprecated by the Cou rt.  The Court 
however called upon the legislature, to codify the law  on the issue, as would 
result in the advancement of justice, as a matter of in stitutional form. 
Part-7.  
The petitioner’s and the interveners’ contentions : 
35. On behalf of the petitioner, besides the petitioner h erself, 
submissions were initiated by Mr. Amit Singh Chadha, Senior Advocate.  He 
invited this Court’s attention to the legislative history in the field of Muslim 
‘personal law’ (-for details, refer to Part-4 – Legis lation in India, in the field 
of Muslim ‘personal law’).  It was submitted, that all fundamental rights 
contained in Part III of the Constitution were justicia ble.  It was therefore 
pointed out, that the petitioner’s cause before this Cou rt, was akin to such 
rights as were considered justiciable.  The practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, 
according to learned counsel, permitted a male spous e an unqualified right, 
to severe the matrimonial tie.  It was pointed out, that the right to divorce a 
wife, by way of triple talaq, could be exercised witho ut the disclosure of any 
reason, and in fact, even in the absence of reasons.   It was submitted, that 
a female spouse had no say in the matter, inasmuch a s, ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
could be pronounced in the absence of the wife, and e ven without her 
knowledge.  It was submitted, that divorce pronounced b y way of triple talaq 
was final and binding, between the parties.  These ac tions, according to 
learned counsel, vested an arbitrary right in the hus band, and as such, 
violated the equality clause enshrined in Article 14 o f the Constitution.  It 68 was submitted, that the Constitution postulates through the above article, 
equality before the law and equal protection of the law s.  This right, 
according to learned counsel, was clearly denied to th e female spouse in the 
matter of pronouncement of divorce by  the husband by adopting the 
procedure of ‘talaq-e-biddat’. Further more, it was su bmitted, the 
Constitution postulates through Article 15, a clear res traint on 
discrimination, on the ground of sex.  It was submitted , that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
violated the aforesaid fundamental right, which postula tes equality between 
men and women.  Learned counsel relied on the decisi ons of this Court in 
Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala 6, and Minerva Mills Ltd. v. Union of 
India 7 to contend, that it was the duty of courts to intervene in  case of 
violation of any individual’s fundamental right, and t o render justice.  It was 
also submitted, that the rights of the female partner in a  matrimonial 
alliance amongst Muslims, had resulted in severe gend er discrimination, 
which amounted to violating their human rights under A rticle 21 of the 
Constitution.  Learned counsel accordingly sought int ervention, for grave 
injustice practiced against Muslim wives. 
36. Mr. Amit Singh Chadha, learned senior counsel, t hen placed 
reliance on the Jiauddin Ahmed 2, and the Rukia Khatun 3 cases (-for 
details, refer to Part-6 – Judicial pronouncements,  on the subject of ‘talaq-
e-biddat’).  Based on the above judgments, it was s ubmitted, that courts 
of this country had not found favour with the pract ice of triple talaq, in 
the manner prevalent in India.  It was contended, t hat ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
                                                 
6 (1973) 4 SCC 225  
7 (1980) 3 SCC 625 69 should not be confused with the profession, practic e and propagation of 
Islam.  It was pointed out, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ w as not sacrosanctal to the 
profession of the Muslim religion.  It was accordin gly submitted, that this 
Court had an indefeasible right, to intervene and r ender justice.  In order 
to press his claim based on constitutional morality , wherein the 
petitioners were claiming not only gender equality,  but also the 
progression of their matrimonial life with dignity,  learned senior counsel 
placed reliance on Manoj Narula v. Union of India 8, wherein this Court 
observed as under: 
“The Constitution of India is a living instrument with  capabilities of 
enormous dynamism. It is a Constitution made for a pr ogressive society. 
Working of such a Constitution depends upon the prev alent atmosphere 
and conditions. Dr Ambedkar had, throughout the debat e, felt that the 
Constitution can live and grow on the bedrock of cons titutional morality. 
Speaking on the same, he said : 
“Constitutional morality is not a natural sentiment. It h as to be 
cultivated. We must realise that our people have yet to le arn it. 
Democracy in India is only a top-dressing on an Ind ian soil, which is 
essentially undemocratic.”  
[Constituent Assembly Debates, 1948, Vol. VII, 38.] 
The principle of constitutional morality basically me ans to bow down to 
the norms of the Constitution and not to act in a manner which would 
become violative of the rule of law or reflectible of  action in an arbitrary 
manner . It actually works at the fulcrum and guides as a las er beam in 
institution building. The traditions and conventions hav e to grow to 
sustain the value of such a morality . The democratic values survive and 
become successful where the people at large and the pe rsons in charge of 
the institution are strictly guided by the constitutional parameters 
without paving the path of deviancy and reflecting in a ction the primary 
concern to maintain institutional integrity and the requ isite 
constitutional restraints. Commitment to the Constitution is  a facet of 
constitutional morality …” 
 
In continuation with the instant submission, it was als o the contention of 
learned senior counsel, that Articles 25, 26 and 29 of  the Constitution, did 
                                                 
8 (2014) 9 SCC 1 70 not in any manner, impair the jurisdiction of this C ourt, to set right the 
apparent breach of constitutional morality.  In this b ehalf, the Court’s 
attention was invited to the fact, that Article 25 itself pos tulates, that the 
freedoms contemplated thereunder, were subject to the ov erriding principles 
enshrined in Part III – Fundamental Rights, of the Con stitution. This 
position, it was submitted, was affirmed through judgme nts rendered by 
this Court in John Vallamattom v. Union of India 9, Javed v. State of 
Haryana 10 , and Khursheed Ahmad Khan v. State of Uttar Pradesh 11 .  
37. Learned senior counsel also drew our attention to the fact, that a 
number of countries had, by way of express legislatio ns, done away with the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  It was submitted, that eve n when talaq was 
pronounced thrice simultaneously, the same has, by leg islation, been 
treated as a single pronouncement, in a number of co untries, including 
countries which have declared Islam as their official  State religion.  It was 
accordingly contended, that had ‘talaq-e-biddat’ been an  essential part of 
religion, i.e., if it constituted a core belief, on wh ich Muslim religion was 
founded, it could not have been interfered with, by suc h legislative 
intervention.  It was accordingly suggested, that this Co urt should have no 
difficulty whatsoever in remedying the cause with whi ch the petitioners had 
approached this Court, as the same was not only violativ e of the 
fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution, but was also in 
contravention of the principle of constitutional morali ty emerging therefrom. 
                                                 
9 (2003) 6 SCC 611  
10  (2003) 8 SCC 369  
11  (2015) 8 SCC 439 71 38. Last of all, it was contended, that it is nobody’s ca se before this 
Court, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is a part of an edict flowing  out of the Quran.  It 
was submitted, that triple talaq is not recognized by many  schools of Islam.  
According to learned counsel, all concerned acknowl edge, that ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ has all along been treated irregular, patriarc hal and even sinful.  It 
was pointed out, that it is accepted by all schools – e ven of Sunni Muslims, 
that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is “bad in theology but good in la w”.  In addition, it was 
pointed out, that even the Union of India had affirmed b efore this Court, the 
position expressed above.  In such situation, it was pr ayed, that this Court 
being a constitutional court, was obliged to perform i ts constitutional 
responsibility under Article 32 of the Constitution,  as a protector, enforcer, 
and guardian of citizens’ rights under Articles 14, 1 5 and 21 of the 
Constitution. It was submitted, that in discharge of the a bove constitutional 
obligation, this Court ought to strike down, the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, 
as violative of the fundamental rights and constitution al morality 
contemplated by the provisions of the Constitution.  I t was commended, 
that the instant practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ should be d one away with, in the 
same manner as the practice of ‘Sati’, ‘Devadasi’ and  ‘Polygamy’, which were 
components of Hindu religion, and faith.  Learned cou nsel concluded his 
submissions by quoting from the Constitutional Law of India, by H.M. 
Seervai (fourth edition, Volume 2, published by N.M. Tripathi Private Ltd., 
Bombay), wherein in clause 12.60, at page 1281, the author has expressed 
the following view: 
“12.60 I am aware that the enforcement of laws which a re violated is the 
duty of Govt., and in a number of recent cases that dut y has not been 72 discharged.  Again, in the last instance, blatant violati on of religious 
freedom by the arbitrary action of religious heads ha s to be dealt with 
firmly by our highest Court.  This duty has resolutely  discharged by our 
High Courts and the Privy Council before our Constitu tion.  No greater 
service can be done to our country than by the Sup. Ct. and the High 
Courts discharging that duty resolutely, disregarding  popular clamour 
and disregarding personal predilections .  I am not unaware of the 
present political and judicial climate.  But I would l ike to conclude with 
the words of very great man “never despair”, for when  evil reaches a 
particular point, the antidote of that evil is near at hand .” 
 
39. Mr. Anand Grover, Senior Advocate, represented Z akia Soman – 
respondent no.10.  Respondent no.10 was added as a pa rty respondent on 
29.6.2016, on the strength of an interlocutory applicati on filed by her.  
Learned senior advocate, in the first instance, invited  our attention to the 
various kinds of ‘talaq’ practiced amongst Muslims (-f or details, refer to 
Part-2 – The practiced modes of ‘talaq’ amongst Musli ms).  It was 
submitted, that ‘talaq-e-ahsan’ and ‘talaq-e-hasan’ were approved by the 
Quran and the ‘hadith’.  It was submitted, that ‘talaq-e- biddat’ is neither 
recognized by the Quran, nor approved by the ‘hadith’.    With reference to 
‘talaq-e-biddat’, it was asserted, that the same was con trary to Quranic 
prescriptions.  It was submitted, that the practice of ‘tala q-e-biddat’ was 
traceable to the second century, after the advent of Isla m.  It was asserted, 
that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is recognized only by a few Sunn i schools, including the 
Hanafi school.  In this behalf, it was also brought t o our notice, that most of 
the Muslims in India belonged to the Hanafi school of Sunni Muslims.  It 
was submitted, that even the Hanafi school acknowledges,  that ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ is a sinful form of divorce, but seeks to justi fy it on the ground that 
though bad in theology, it is good in law.  In India ‘ talaq-e-biddat’, according 
to learned counsel, gained validity based on the acce ptance of the same by 73 the British courts, prior to independence.  It was submi tted, that the 
judgments rendered by the British courts were finally crystallized, in the 
authoritative pronouncement by the Privy Council in the  Rashid Ahmad 
case 1.  It was pointed out, that thereafter, ‘talaq-e-biddat’ h as been 
consistently practised in India. 
40. The first contention advanced at the hands of learne d senior 
counsel was, that after the adoption of the Constitution,  various High 
Courts in India had the occasion to consider the validi ty of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, 
exercised by Muslim men to divorce their wives.  And all the High Courts 
(which had the occasion to deal with the issue) unani mously arrived at the 
conclusion, that the same could not muster support ei ther from the Quran 
or the ‘hadith’.  In this behalf, the Court’s attention w as drawn to the 
various judgments of High Courts including the High C ourt of Gauhati in 
the Jiauddin Ahmed case 2 – by a Single Bench, and by the same High 
Court in the Rukia Khatun case 3 – by a Division Bench.  By the Delhi 
High Court in the Masroor Ahmed case 4 – by a Single Bench, and finally 
by the Kerala High Court in the Nazeer case 5 – by a Single Bench (-for 
details, refer to Part-6 – Judicial pronouncements,  on the subject of ‘talaq-
e-biddat’).   It was submitted, that the High Court s were fully justified in 
their opinions and their conclusions.  It was point ed out, that despite the 
aforesaid judgments, Muslim husbands continued to d ivorce their wives 
by ‘talaq-e-biddat’, and therefore, an authoritativ e pronouncement on the 
matter was required to be delivered, by this Court.   Based on the 
decisions relied upon, it was submitted, that a Mus lim husband, could 74 not enjoy arbitrary or unilateral power to proclaim  a divorce, as the same 
does not accord with Islamic traditions. It was als o contended, that the 
proclamation of talaq must be for a demonstrated re asonable cause, and 
must proceed by an attempt at reconciliation by two  arbiters (one each, 
from the side of the rival parties).  In order to a ffirm the aforesaid position, 
learned counsel placed reliance on Shamim Ara v. St ate of U.P. 12 , to 
assert, that this Court approved the judgments refe rred to above. It was 
accordingly asserted, that this Court has already r ecognized, the Quranic 
position as recorded in verses 128 to 130 of ‘sura’  IV and verses 229-232 
of ‘sura’ II, and also, ‘verse’ 35 of ‘sura’ IV.  T hese verses, according to 
learned senior counsel, declare the true Quranic po sition on the subject of 
divorce (-for details, refer to Part-3 – The Holy Q uran – with reference to 
‘talaq’).  Learned counsel heavily relied on the de cision rendered by the 
Delhi High Court in the Masroor Ahmed case 4, and by the Kerala High 
Court in the Nazeer case 5 to bring home his contention, that ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ was wholly unjustified and could not be rec ognized as a valid 
means of divorce in the Muslim community.  It was t he vehement 
submission of learned counsel, that the legal posit ion being canvassed on 
behalf of the petitioners, clearly emerged from the  judgments referred to 
above, and should be treated as the foundation, for adoption and 
declaration by this Court.  It was therefore prayed , that triple talaq as was 
being practiced in India, be declared unsustainable  in law. 
                                                 
12  (2002) 7 SCC 518 75 41. It was also contended by learned senior counsel, that the settled 
principles applicable in all common law jurisdictio ns including India was 
that courts do not test the constitutionality of laws and  procedures, if the 
issue arising between the parties can be decided on o ther grounds.  It was 
submitted, that only when the relief being sought, cann ot be granted 
without going into the constitutionality of the law, on ly then courts need to 
enter the thicket of its constitutional validity.  Learn ed counsel invited the 
Court’s attention, to the judgment of this Court in State of  Bihar v. Rai 
Bahadur Hurdut Roy Moti Lal Jute Mills 13 , wherein this Court refused to 
test the constitutional validity of certain provisions,  by holding as under: 
“7. On behalf of the appellant Mr Lal Narain Sinha ha s contended that 
the High Court was in error in holding that the proviso  to Section 14A 
violates either Article 20(1) or Article 31(2) of the C onstitution. He has 
addressed us at length in support of his case that neithe r of the two 
articles is violated by the impuged proviso. On the oth er hand, the 
learned Solicitor-General has sought to support the fin dings of the High 
Court on the said two constitutional points; and he ha s pressed before 
us as a preliminary point his argument that on a fair a nd reasonable 
construction, the proviso cannot be applied to the case o f the first 
respondent. We would, therefore, first deal with this p reliminary point. In 
cases where the vires of statutory provisions are chall enged on 
constitutional grounds, it is essential that the material  facts should first 
be clarified and ascertained with a view to determine whether the 
impugned statutory provisions are attracted; if they are , the 
constitutional challenge to their validity must be exami ned and decided. 
If, however, the facts admitted or proved do not attract the  impugned 
provisions there is no occasion to decide the issue ab out the vires of the 
said provisions. Any decision on the said question w ould in such a case 
be purely academic. Courts are and should be reluctan t to decide 
constitutional points merely as matters of academic imp ortance . 
  xxx   xxx   xxx 
19. In view of this conclusion it is unnecessary to c onsider the objections 
raised by the first respondent against the validity of the proviso on the 
ground that it contravenes Articles 20(1) and 31(2) of  the 
Constitution..…” 
 
                                                 
13  AIR 1960 SC 378 76 In the context of ‘personal law’, it was submitted, that in Shabnam Hashmi 
v. Union of India 14 , the Court had recently refused to examine the 
constitutional validity of ‘personal laws’, when the i ssue could be plainly 
decided on the interpretation of the concerned statute.  It was therefore 
contended, that through a purely interpretative exercise , this Court should 
declare ‘talaq-e-biddat’ as illegal, ineffective and h aving no force in law, in 
the same manner as the Gauhati High Court and the Delh i High Court, 
have previously so held.  It was submitted, that the same  declaration be 
given by this Court, by an interpretation of ‘personal  law’, as would 
incorporate the ingredients of the permissible and acce ptable modes of talaq 
into ‘talaq-e-biddat’.   
42. In the present determination, learned senior counsel s ubmitted, 
that it would be essential to recognize the existence of distortions in the 
‘hadiths’.  It was pointed out, that it was by now well s ettled, that there 
were various degrees of reliability and/or authentic ity of different ‘hadiths’ 
(reference in this behalf was made to – Principles of  Mohomedan Law by Sir 
Dinshaw Fardunji Mulla, LexisNexis, Butterworths Wadhw a, Nagpur, 20 th  
edition).  It was the contention of learned senior coun sel, that the All India 
Muslim Personal Law Board (hereinafter referred to a s, the AIMPLB), had 
relied on ‘hadiths’, that were far removed from the tim e of the Prophet.  It 
was submitted, that they were therefore far less credib le and authentic, and 
also distorted and unreliable, as against the ‘hadiths ’ taken into 
consideration in the judgments rendered by the High Co urts (-for details, 
                                                 
14  (2014) 4 SCC 1 77 refer to Part-6 – Judicial pronouncements, on the sub ject of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’).  It was pointed out, that the AIMPLB had relied upon a later 
‘hadith’ (that is, Sunan Bayhaqi 7/547).  It was poi nted out, that when 
compared to the ‘hadith’ of Bhukahri (published by Da russalam, Saudi 
Arabia), the ‘hadith’ relied upon by the AIMPLB appe ared to be a clear 
distortion. It was also submitted, that the ‘hadith’ relie d upon by the 
AIMPLB, was not found in the Al Bukhari Hadiths, and a s such, it would be 
inappropriate to place reliance on the same.  As again st the submissions 
advanced on behalf of AIMPLB, it was pointed out (in rejoinder), that Sahih 
Muslims believe, that during the Prophet’s time, and tha t of the First Caliph 
Abu Baqhr and the Second Caliph Umar, pronouncements  of ‘talaq’ by three 
consecutive utterances were treated as one.  Reference in this behalf was  
made to “Sahih Muslim” compiled by Al-Hafiz Zakiuddi n Abdul-Azim Al-
Mundhiri, and published by Darussalam.  Learned sen ior counsel also 
invited this Court’s attention to “The lawful and the pro hibited in Islam” by 
Al-Halal Wal Haram Fil Islam (edition – August 2009),  which was of 
Egyptian origin.  It was pointed out, that Egypt was prim arily a Sunni 
Hanafi nation.  It was submitted, that the text of the above  publication, 
clearly showed, that the practice of instant talaq was des cribed sinful, and 
was to be abhorred.  Reference was also made to “Woma n in Islamic 
Shariah” by Maulana Wahiduddin Khan (published by G oodword Books, 
reprinted in 2014), wherein it is opined, that triple ta laq pronounced on a 
singular occasion, would be treated as a single pron ouncement of talaq, in 
terms of the ‘hadith’ of Imam Abu Dawud in Fath al-bar i 9/27.  It was 78 submitted, that the views of the above author, were also r elied upon by the 
Delhi High Court in the Masroor Ahmed case 4.  Reference was also made to 
“Marriage and family life in Islam” by Prof. (Dr.) A. Rahman (Adam 
Publishers and Distributors, New Delhi, 2013 edition),  wherein by placing 
reliance on a Hanafi Muslim scholar, it was expresse d that triple talaq was 
not in consonance with Quranic verses.  Reliance was  also placed on “Imam 
Abu Hanifa – Life and Work” by Allamah Shiblinu’man i’s of Azamgarh, who 
founded the Shibli College in the 19 th  century.  It was submitted, that Abu 
Hanifa himself ruled, that it was forbidden to give thre e divorces at the 
same time, and whoever did so was a sinner.  Based o n the aforestated 
submissions, it was the pointed contention of learned s enior counsel, that 
there was no credibility in the position adopted by the AIMPLB, in its 
pleadings to demonstrate the validity of the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’. 
43. Based on the above submissions, it was contended, that the 
judgment rendered by the Privy Council in the Rashid Ahmad case 1 with 
reference to the validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ needed to be overruled.  Since 
‘talaq-e-biddat’ cannot be traced to the Quran, and since  the Prophet 
himself deprecated it, and since ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was considered sinful by all 
schools of Sunni Muslims, and as invalid by all the  Shia Muslim schools, it 
could not be treated to be a part of Muslim ‘personal l aw’. It was asserted, 
that triple talaq was not in tune with the prevailing soc ial conditions, as 
Muslim women were vociferously protesting against th e practice.  Learned 
senior counsel solicited, that this Court in order to res olve the present 
dispute, declare that the pronouncement of triple talaq b y a Muslim 79 husband, in order to divorce his wife, would be treat ed as a single 
pronouncement of talaq, and would have to follow the p rocedure of ‘talaq-e-
ahsan’ (or, ‘talaq-e-hasan’) in accordance with the Qu ran, so as to conclude 
a binding dissolution of marriage by way of ‘talaq’,  in terms of Muslim 
‘personal law’. 
44. Ms. Indira Jaising, Senior Advocate, was the thir d counsel to 
represent the cause of the petitioners.  She entered app earance on behalf of 
respondent no.7 –  Centre for Study of Society and Secularism, which cam e 
to be added as a party respondent vide an order dated  29.6.2016. It was the 
contention of learned senior counsel, that the term ‘per sonal laws’ had not 
been defined in the Constitution, although there was reference to the same 
in entry 5 of the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedu le. Learned counsel 
referred to Article 372 of the Constitution which mandat es, that all laws in 
force, in the territory of India immediately before th e commencement of the 
Constitution, “shall” continue in force until altered or repealed or amended 
by a competent legislature (or other competent authorit y). It was submitted, 
that on personal issues, Muslims were governed by the Muslim ‘personal 
law’ – Shariat. It was contended, that even before, the commencement of the 
Constitution, the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Appl ication Act, 1937 
enforced Muslim ‘personal law’, and as such, the Mus lim ‘personal law’ 
should be considered as a “law in force”, within the meaning of Article 
13(3)(b).  It was pointed out, that the instant position made the legal 
position separate and distinct from what ordinarily fa lls in the realm of 
‘personal law’.  It was also highlighted, that a readi ng of entry 5 in the 80 Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule, leaves no room  for any doubt, that 
‘personal law’ necessarily has to have nexus, to issu es such as marriage 
and divorce, infants and minors, adoptions, wills, in testacy and succession, 
joint family property and partition, etc.  It was conte nted, that ‘personal law’ 
could therefore conveniently be described as family l aw, namely, disputes 
relating to issues concerning the family. It was pointe d out, that such family 
law disputes, were ordinarily adjudicated upon by th e Family Courts, set up 
under the Family Courts Act, 1984. The matters which ar ise for 
consideration before the Family Courts are disputes of marriage (namely, 
restitution of conjugal rights, or judicial separation,  or dissolution of 
marriage), and the like.  Based on the above backdro p, it was submitted, 
that it could be safely accepted that ‘personal law’ dea ls with family laws 
and law of succession such as marriage, divorce, ch ild custody, inheritance, 
etc. 
45. Based on the foundation recorded in the preceding paragraph, it 
was submitted, that the question in the present controversy was, whether 
“rule of decision” (the term used in Section 2, of th e Shariat Act) could be 
challenged, on the ground that the same was violative  of the fundamental 
rights postulated in Part III of the Constitution? It wa s the pointed 
contention of learned counsel, that no “rule of decisio n” can be violative of 
Part III of the Constitution.  It was acknowledged (we w ould say – fairly), 
that ‘personal law’ which pertained to disputes between the family and 
private individuals (wherein the State has no role), ca nnot be subject to a 
challenge, on the ground of being violative of the fun damental rights 81 enshrined in Part III of the Constitution.  It was submi tted, that insofar as 
Muslim ‘personal law’ is concerned, it could no long er be treated as 
‘personal law’, because it had been statutorily declar ed as “rule of decision” 
by Section 2 of the Shariat Act.  It was therefore asse rted, that all questions 
pertaining to Muslims, ‘personal law’ having been des cribed as “rule of 
decision” could no longer be treated as private matter s between parties, nor 
can they be treated as matters of mere ‘personal law’ .  It was therefore 
contended, that consequent upon the inclusion/subject of  the question of 
“…dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zih ar, lian, khula and 
mubaraat,…”, amongst Muslims in the statute book, the same  did not 
remain a private matter between the parties.  And as suc h, all 
questions/matters, falling within the scope of Section 2  aforementioned, 
were liable to be considered as matters of ‘public law ’.  Learned senior 
counsel therefore asserted, that no one could contest the  legitimacy of a 
challenge to ‘public law’ on the ground of being viol ative of the provisions of 
the Constitution.  In support of the aforesaid foundati onal premise, learned 
senior counsel placed reliance on Charu Khurana v. Union of India 15 , to 
contend that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ should be considered as a rbitrary and 
discriminatory, under Articles 14 and 15, in the same  manner as the rule 
prohibiting women make-up artists and hair dressers from becoming 
members of registered make-up artists and hair dresser s association, was 
so declared.  It was also pointed out, that discriminatio n based on sex was 
opposed to gender justice, which position was clearly applicable to the 
                                                 
15  (2015) 1 SCC 192 82 controversy in hand.  Insofar as the instant aspect of th e matter is 
concerned, learned counsel placed reliance on the f ollowing observations 
recorded in the above judgment: 
“46. These bye-laws have been certified by the Registr ar of Trade Unions 
in exercise of the statutory power. Clause 4, as is de monstrable, violates 
Section 21 of the Act, for the Act has not made any distin ction between 
men and women. Had it made a bald distinction it would  have been 
indubitably unconstitutional. The legislature, by way of amendment in 
Section 21-A, has only fixed the age. It is clear to us  that the clause, 
apart from violating the statutory command, also violate s the 
constitutional mandate which postulates that there cannot b e any 
discrimination on the ground of sex. Such discrimin ation in the access of 
employment and to be considered for the employment unle ss some 
justifiable riders are attached to it, cannot withstand sc rutiny. When the 
access or entry is denied, Article 21 which deals wit h livelihood is 
offended. It also works against the fundamental human rights. Such 
kind of debarment creates a concavity in her capacit y to earn her 
livelihood . 
  xxx   xxx   xxx  
50. From the aforesaid enunciation of law, the signi fication of right to 
livelihood gets clearly spelt out. A clause in the bye- laws of a trade 
union, which calls itself an Association, which is a ccepted by the 
statutory authority, cannot play foul of Article 21 .” 
 
46. Learned senior counsel, thereupon attempted to expr ess the same 
position, through a different reasoning.  It is necessa ry to recall, that the 
question posed for consideration is, whether this Court  should accept “rule 
of decision” under Section 2 of the Shariat Act – as “ laws in force” within the 
meaning of Article 13 of the Constitution, and thereby , test the validity 
thereof, on the touchstone of the fundamental rights ensh rined in Part III of 
the Constitution?  It was the fervent contention of learn ed senior counsel, 
that all questions falling for consideration within the  meaning of the term 
“rule of decision” had necessarily to be treated as “ laws in force”.  Thus, it 
was submitted, that such laws were to be in consonance with the provisions 
of Part III – Fundamental Rights, of the Constitution.  I nsofar as the 83 challenge to the constitutional validity of ‘talaq-e-bi ddat’ is concerned, 
learned senior counsel, adopted the submissions advan ced by other learned 
counsel. 
47. Learned senior counsel, then placed reliance on the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the United Nation s General 
Assembly on 10.12.1948, to contend that the preamble ther eof recognised 
the inherent dignity of the entire human family, as eq ual and inalienable.    
It was submitted, that the charter provides for equal rig hts to men and 
women.  It was submitted, that Article 1 thereof provides,  that all human 
beings were born free and equal, in dignity and rig hts.  Referring to Article 
2, it was submitted, that there could be no distinction/di scrimination on 
the basis inter alia  of sex and/or religion.  It was submitted, that it was  this 
Court’s responsibility to widen, and not to narrow, t he right of equality 
contained in the aforestated Declaration.  The Court’s a ttention was also 
drawn to the International Convention on Economic, Soci al and Cultural 
Rights (ICESCR), which provided for elimination of al l forms of 
discrimination against women.  The instant convention w as adopted by the 
United Nations General Assembly on 10.04.1979.  It wa s submitted, that 
the International Convention bill of rights for women, was instituted on 
3.9.1981, and had been ratified by 189 States.  It was pointed out, that 
India had also endorsed the same.  It was submitted, tha t Article 1 thereof 
defines “discrimination”, as discrimination against wo men on the basis of 
sex.  Referring to Article 2, it was submitted, that all State parties who 
ratified the above convention, condemned discriminatio n against women in 84 all its forms, and agreed to eliminate discrimination  against women by 
following the principle of equality amongst men and  women, in their 
national Constitutions, as well as, other legislations .  It was submitted, that 
Article 2 of the convention mandates, that all States would  take all steps to 
eliminate discrimination against women – by any perso n, organisation or 
enterprise.  It was submitted, that insofar as the presen t controversy is 
concerned, the provisions of the above declarations an d conventions can be 
relied upon, to test the validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, b y treating it as “rule of 
decision” and for that matter, as law in force (on the to uchstone of Articles 
14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution).  It was further sub mitted, that in any 
case, the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, clearly violated  the norms adopted by 
the declaration, and conventions. 
48. It was acknowledged, by learned senior counsel, that India 
recognises a plural legal system, wherein different r eligious communities 
are permitted to be governed by different ‘personal la ws’, applicable to them.  
It was submitted, that there could be no dispute, that diffe rent religious 
communities can have different laws, but the laws of ea ch religious 
community must meet the test of constitutional validity  and/or 
constitutional morality, inasmuch as, they cannot be vi olative of Articles 14 
and 15 of the Constitution.  Viewed in the above context,  it was submitted, 
that even though matters of faith and belief are protected  by Article 25 of 
the Constitution, yet law relating  to marriage and divorce were matters of 
faith and belief, were also liable to be tested on gr ounds of public order, 
morality and health, as well as, on the touchstone of  the other provisions of 85 Part III of the Constitution.  Therefore, on a plain re ading of Article 25, 
according to learned senior counsel, the right to fre edom of conscience was 
subject to public order, morality, health, and the othe r provisions contained 
in Part III of the Constitution.  And as such, accordi ng to learned counsel, 
the said rights must be so interpreted, that no ‘person al law’ negates any of 
the postulated conditions contained in Article 25 of the C onstitution itself.  
It was submitted, that Articles 14 and 15 of the Constituti on were not 
subject to any restrictions, including any restriction un der Article 25 or 26 
of the Constitution.  It was contended, that the cardinal  principle of 
interpretation of the Constitution was, that all provisio ns of the 
Constitution must be harmoniously construed, so that there remained no 
conflict between them.  It was therefore submitted, that Ar ticles 14 and 15 
on the one hand, and Articles 25 and 26 on the other, must be 
harmoniously construed with each other, to prevent discr imination against 
women, in a manner as would give effect to equality, irrespective of gender.  
It was contended, that it was totally irrelevant whether ‘pe rsonal law’ was 
founded on custom or religion, or was codified or un codified, if it is law and 
“rule of decision”, it can be challenged under Part III of the Constitution.   
49. Learned senior counsel, also expressed a person al view on the 
matter, namely, that divorce altered the status of  marri ed women, which 
can leave her destitute.  It was asserted, that for all other communities in 
India, divorce could only be obtained from a judicia l forum.  And, a 
judgment and decree of divorce, was a decision in rem, which alters the legal 
status of the concerned person, as against the whole wo rld.  It was 86 submitted, that for all other communities in India, divo rce was not a matter 
between the private parties, to be settled on their own.  Nor could any 
‘fatwa’ be issued, recognising unilateral ‘talaq’.  I t was submitted, that for 
one party alone, the right to annul a marriage, by a unilateral private ‘talaq’, 
was clearly against public policy, and required to be  declared as 
impermissible in law, and even unconstitutional.  In  this behalf, it was 
contended, that no person’s status could be adversely a ltered so as to suffer 
civil consequences (for the concerned person – the wi fe in this case) by a 
private declaration.  It was submitted, that annulment of th e matrimonial 
bond was essentially a judicial function, which must be exercised by a 
judicial forum.  Any divorce granted by way of a pri vate action, could not be 
considered as legally sustainable in law.  And for t he instant additional 
reason, it was submitted, that unilateral talaq in the natu re of talaq-e-
biddat, whereby, a Muslim woman’s status was associat ed with adverse civil 
consequences, on the unilateral determination of the ma le spouse, by way 
of a private declaration, must be considered (-and ther efore, be held) as 
clearly unsustainable in law. 
50. Mr. Salman Khurshid, Senior Advocate, appearing  as an intervener, 
submitted, that for searching a solution to a conflict, o r for the resolution of 
a concern under Islamic law, reference had first to b e made to the Quran.  
The availability of an answer to the disagreement, fr om the text of the 
Quran, has to be treated as a final pronouncement on t he issue.  When 
there is no clear guidance from the Quran, reference must be made to the 
traditions of the Prophet Muhammad – ‘sunna’, as record ed in the ‘hadiths’. 87 If no guidance is available on the issue, even from  the ‘hadiths’, reference 
must then be made to the general consensus of opinion –  ‘ijma’.  If a 
resolution to the dispute is found in ‘ijma’, it shoul d be considered as a final 
view on the conflicting issue, under Islamic law.  It was submitted, that the 
precaution that needed to be adopted while referring t o ‘hadiths’ or ‘ijma’ 
was, that neither of the two can derogate from the positio n depicted in the 
Quran.   
51. Learned senior counsel, then invited our attention to  different kinds 
of ‘talaq’, including ‘ila’, ‘zihar’, ‘khula’ and ‘m ubaarat’.  It was emphasised, 
that the concept of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ (also described as i rregular talaq), was 
based on the limit of three talaqs available to a man , namely, that a man 
can divorce the same wife (woman) three times in his life time.  The first two 
are revocable within the period of ‘iddat’, whereas , the third talaq was 
irrevocable.  Learned senior counsel, then invited the  Court’s attention to 
verses from the Quran (-for details, refer to Part-3 –  The Holy Quran, with 
reference to ‘talaq’).  However, during the course of his submissions, learned 
senior counsel emphasized the fact, that mere repetition  of divorce thrice in 
one sitting, would not result in a final severance of the matrimonial 
relationship between spouses.  In order to support his  above contention, 
reliance was placed on the following traditions, from  Sunna Muslim: 
“i. [3652] 1 – (1471)  It was narrated from Ibn ‘Umar  that he divorced his 
wife while she was menstruating, at the time of the Messe nger of Allah 
‘Umar bin Al-Khattâb asked the Messenger of Allah abo ut that and the 
Messenger of Allah said to him: “Tell him to take her  back, then wait 
until she has become pure, then menstruated again, the n become pure 
again.  Then if he wishes he may keep her, or if he  wishes he may divorce 
her before he has intercourse with her .  That is the ‘Iddah (prescribed 
periods) for which Allah has enjoined the divorce of  women.” 88 ii. [3673] 15 – (1472)  It was narrated that Ibn ‘Abb âs said: “During the 
time of the Messenger of Allah it, Abü Bakr and the fi rst two years of 
‘Umar’s Khjlâfah, a threefold divorce (giving divorc e thrice in one sitting) 
was counted as one .  Then ‘Umar bin Al-Khattâb said : ‘People have 
become hasty in a matter in which they should take thei r time.  I am 
thinking of holding them to it.’  So he made it binding upon them.” 
iii. [3674] 16 – (…) Ibn Tawüs narrated from his fa ther that Abü As-
Sahbâ’ said to Ibn ‘Abbâs: “Do you know that the threef old divorce was 
regarded as one at the time of the Messenger of Allah iW and Abü Bakr, 
and for three years of ‘Umar’s leadership? “He said:  “Yes” . 
iv. [3675] 17 – (…) It was narrated from Tawüs that AN  As-Sahbâ’ said to 
Ibn ‘Abbâs: “Tell us of something interesting that you know.  Wasn’t the 
threefold divorce counted as one at the time of the Messe nger of Allah 
and Abü Bakr?”  He said: “That was so, then at the tim e of ‘Umar the 
people began to issue divorces frequently, so he made  it binding upon 
them . 
v. “Mahmud-b, Labeed reported that the Messenger of Al lah was 
informed about a man who gave three divorces at a time  to his wife.  
Then he got up enraged and said, ‘Are you playing wi th the Book of Allah 
who is great and glorious while I am still amongst you ?  So much so that 
a man got up and said; shall I not kill him.”  
vi. According to an Hadith quoted by M. Mohammed Ali in Manual of 
Hadeth p. 2861 from Masnad of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbul 1:34, the 
procedure during the time of Prophet and the caliphate of Abu Bakr, and 
the first two years of Hazrat Umar was that divorce uttere d thrice was 
considered as one divorce .  The Umar said, “people had made haste in a 
matter in which that was moderation for them, so we may  make it take 
effect with regard to them.  So he made it take effect to them.”  The Holy  
Quran is however very clear on the point that such a di vorce must be 
deemed to be a single divorce . 
vii. There is another tradition reported by Rokanah- b.  Abu Yazid that 
he gave his wife Sahalmash an irrevocable divorce, and he conveyed it to 
the Messenger of Allah and said: by Allah, I have no t intended but one 
divorce.  Then messenger of Allah asked Have you no t intended but one 
(divorce)?  Rokana said: By Allah, I did not intend b ut one divorce.  The 
Messenger of Allah then returned her back to him.  Af terwards he 
divorced her for second time at the time of Hadrat Omar and third time 
at the time of Hadrat Osman. 
viii. The Quranic philosophy of divorce is further b uttressed by the 
Hadith of the Prophet wherein he warned, ‘of all thing s which have been 
permitted, divorce is the most hated by Allah’.  The Pr ophet told his 
people: “Al-Talaqu indallah-I abghad al-mubahat”, m eaning “Divorce is 
most detestable in the sight of God; abstain from it .” 
ix. [2005] 43 – (867)  It was narrated that Jâbir bin ‘Abdullâh said: 
“When the Messenger of Allah delivered a Khutbah, his  eyes would turn 
red, his voice would become loud, and his anger wou ld increase, until it 
was as if he was warning of an attacking army, saying : ‘The enemy will 
attack in the morning or in the evening.’  He said: ‘ The Hour and I have 89 been sent like these two,’ and he held his index fing er and middle finger 
up together.  And he would say: ‘The best of speech i s the Book of Allah, 
the best of guidance is the guidance of Muhammad, and  the worst of 
matters are those which are newly-invented, and every  innovation is a 
going astray.’  Then he would say: ‘I am closer to ev ery believer than his 
own self.  Whoever leaves behind wealth, it is for hi s family; whoever 
leaves behind a debt or dependants, then the responsibi lity of paying it 
off and of caring for them rests upon me. 
x. [2006] 44 – (…) Jâbir bin ‘Abdullâh said: “In th e Khutbah of the 
Prophet on Friday, he would praise Allah, then he wo uld say other 
things, raising his voice…” a similar Hadith (as no. 2005). 
xi. [4796] 59 – (1852) It was narrated that Ziyâd bin ‘Ilâqah said: “I heard 
‘Arfajah say: ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah say: “ There will be Fitnah 
and innovations.  Whoever wants to divide this Ummah wh en it is 
united, strike him with the sword, no matter who he is. ” 
xii. [4797] (…) A similar report (as no.2796) was na rrated from ‘Arfajah 
from the Prophet, except that in their Hadith it says: “…k ill him”.” 
 
Based on the above, it was submitted, that in terms of the  clear message in 
the Quran, the acts and sayings of the Prophet Muhammad are to be 
obeyed.  Therefore, when the aforementioned ‘hadiths’  are available stating 
in clear terms, that the Prophet Muhammad, considered the 
pronouncement of three divorces in one sitting as one, that should be given 
due expression.  It was the contention of learned senio r counsel, that it is 
reported, that when once news was brought to the Prophe t Muhammad, 
that one of his disciples had divorced his wife, by p ronouncing three talaqs 
at one and the same time, the Prophet Muhammad stood up i n anger and 
declared that the man was making a plaything of the wor ds of God, and 
made him take back his wife.  The instance, which is supported by 
authentic  support through available text, according  to learned senior 
counsel, was sufficient by itself, to dispose of the pr esent controversy. 
52. It was also submitted, that even if one examines th e deeds of the 
Prophet Muhammad’s companions, it was quite clear from  the ‘hadiths’, 90 that the same were followed during Caliph Abu Bakr’s ti me, and also during 
the first two years of Caliph Umar.  But thereafter, o nly to meet an 
exigency, Caliph Umar started accepting the practice of pronouncing three 
divorces in one sitting, as final and irrevocable.  I nsofar as the instant 
aspect of the matter is concerned, learned senior co unsel narrated the 
following background: 
“(a) Caliph Umar, finding that the checks imposed by the Prophet on the 
facility of repudiation interfered with the indulgence of their caprice, 
endeavoured to find an escape from the strictness of the  law, and found 
in the pliability of the jurists a loophole to effect the ir purpose. 
(b) When the Arabs conquered Syria, Egypt, Perisa, etc . they found 
women there much better in appearance as compared to A rabian women 
and hence they wanted to marry them.  But the Egyptian an d Syrian 
women insisted that in order to marry them, they should d ivorce their 
existing wives instantaneously, by pronouncing three di vorces in one 
sitting. 
(c) The condition was readily acceptable to the Arabs,  because they knew 
that in Islam divorce was permissible only twice in t wo separate period of 
tuhr and its repetition in one sitting was considered u n-Islamic, void and 
not effective.  In this way, they could not only marry these women, but 
also retain their existing wives.  This fact was report ed to the second 
Caliph Hazrat Umar. 
(d)  The Caliph Umar then, in order to prevent misuse of the religion by 
the unscrupulous husbands decreed, that even repetition  of the word 
talaq, talaq, talaq at one sitting, would dissolve the mar riage irrevocably.  
It was, however, a mere administrative measure of Cali ph Umar, to meet 
an emergency situation, and not to make it a legally bi nding precedent 
permanently.” 
 
53. It was also the contention of learned senior couns el, that Hanafi 
jurists who considered three pronouncements at one sittin g, as amounting 
to a final divorce explained, that in those days people  did not actually mean 
three divorces but meant only one divorce, and other tw o pronouncements 
were meant merely to emphasise the first pronouncement.  But in the 
contemporary era, three pronouncements were made with the intention to 
effect three separate and distinct declarations, and he nce, they were not to 91 be counted as a singular announcement.  This interpre tation of the Hanafi 
jurists, it was submitted, was generally not acceptable, as it went against 
the very spirit of the Quran, as well as, the ‘hadith ’ which enjoin, that in 
case of breach between husband and wife, it should b e referred to the 
arbitration, and failing an amicable settlement, a divo rce was permissible, 
subject to a period of waiting or ‘idaat’, during whi ch a reconciliation was 
also to be attempted, and if successful, the husband c ould take back his 
wife.  The main idea in the procedure for divorce, a s laid down by Islam, it 
was submitted, was to give the parties an opportunity for  repproachment. If 
three pronouncements are treated as a ‘mughallazah’ – divorce, then no 
opportunity is available to the spouses, to retrieve a  decision taken in haste.  
The rule of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, it was pointed out, was in troduced long after the 
time of the Prophet.  It was submitted, that it renders th e measures 
provided for in the Quran against hasty action inef fective, and thereby 
deprives people of a chance to change their minds, to retrieve their mistakes 
and retain their wives. 
54. Based on the above submissions, it was contended,  that though 
matters of religion have periodically come before co urts in India, and the 
issues have been decided in the context of Articles 25 and 26 of the 
Constitution.  Raising concerns over issues of empow erment of all citizens 
and gender justice, it was submitted, had increased the  demand on courts 
to respond to new challenges.  The present slew of cas es, it was pointed out, 
was a part of that trend.  It was submitted, that the Supreme  Court could 
not refuse to engage itself, on the ground that the issue s involved have 92 political overtones or motives, and also because, they might pertain to a 
narrow constitutional permissibility.  It was contended , that to refuse an 
invitation to examine broader issues such as whether ‘ personal laws’ were 
part of ‘laws in force’ under Article 13, and therefor e, subject to judicial 
review, or whether a uniform civil code should be en forced, would not be 
appropriate.  It was submitted, if the immediate concern  about triple talaq 
could be addressed, by endorsing a more acceptable a lternate 
interpretation, based on a pluralistic reading of the s ources of Islam, i.e., by 
taking a holistic view of the Quran and the ‘hadith’ as  indicated by various 
schools of thought (not just the Hanafi school), it wou ld be sufficient for the 
purpose of ensuring justice to the petitioners, and oth ers similarly 
positioned as them. 
55. In support of his above submissions, learned sen ior counsel placed 
reliance on legislative changes with reference to ‘tal aq-e-biddat’ all over the 
world (-for details, refer to Part-5 – Abrogation  of the practice of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ by legislation, the world over, in Islamic, a s well as, non-Islamic 
States).  Reliance was also placed on judicial pronou ncements, rendered by 
different High Courts with reference to ‘talaq-e-bidda t’ (-for details, refer to 
Part-6 – Judicial pronouncements, on the subject of ‘ talaq-e-biddat’), so as 
to conclude, that triple talaq pronounced at the same time should be 
treated as a single pronouncement of divorce, and ther eafter, for severing 
matrimonial ties, the husband would have to complete the  prescribed 
procedure provided for ‘talaq-e-ahsan’/‘talaq-e-hasan ’, and only thereafter, 
the parties would be treated as divorced. 93 56. While advancing his aforesaid contention, there wa s also a note of 
caution expressed by learned senior counsel.  It was  pointed out, that it was 
not the role of a court, to interpret Muslim ‘persona l law’ – Shariat.  It was 
asserted, that under Muslim ‘personal law’, the religi ous head – the Imam 
would be called upon, to decipher the teachings of th e Quran and the 
‘hadiths’ in case of a conflict.  And thereupon, the  Imam had the 
responsibility to resolve issues of conflict, not on  the basis of his own views, 
but by reading the verses, namely, the Quran and the ‘ hadiths’, and to 
determine therefrom, the correct interpretation.  It was s ubmitted, that the 
role of a court, not being a body well versed in the intricacies of faith, would 
not extend to an interpretation of either the Quran or the ‘ hadiths’, and 
therefore, ‘talaq-e-biddat’ should also be interpreted on the touchstone of 
reasonableness, in tune with the prevailing societal ou tlook. 
57. Ms. Nitya Ramakrishna, Advocate, appeared on be half of 
respondent no.11 (in Writ Petition (C) No.118 of 2016) - Dr.  Noorjehan Safia 
Niaz, who was impleaded as such, by an order dated 29.6.2016.  It was 
submitted by learned counsel, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was a  mode of divorce 
that operated instantaneously.  It was contended, that the p ractice of ‘talaq-
e-biddat’, was absolutely invalid even in terms of Mus lim ‘personal law’ – 
‘Shariat’.  It was submitted, that it was not required of this Court to strike 
down the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, it was submitted, that it would suffice 
if this Court merely upholds the order passed by the D elhi High Court in 
the Masroor Ahmed case 4, by giving a meaningful interpretation to ‘talaq-e- 94 biddat’, which would be in consonance with the verses of the Quran and the 
relevant ‘hadiths’. 
58. It was also asserted by learned counsel, that Isla m from its very 
inception recognized rights of women, which were not a vailable to women of 
other communities.  It was pointed out, that the right of divorce was 
conferred on Muslim women, far before this right was  conferred on women 
belonging to other communities.  It was asserted, tha t even in the 7 th  
century, Islam granted women the right of divorce and r emarriage.  The 
aforesaid legal right, according to learned counsel, was recognized by the 
British, when it promulgated the Shariat Act in 1937.  It was submitted, 
that through the above legislation all customs and usa ges contrary to the 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, were unequivocall y annulled.  It was 
therefore contended, that while evaluating the validity o f ‘talaq-e-biddat’, 
this Court should be conscious of the fact, that the Mu slim ‘personal law’ – 
‘Shariat’, was a forward looking code of conduct, reg ulating various features 
in the lives of those who professed the Muslim religio n. 
59. It was also submitted, that the Quran did not recogniz e ‘talaq-e-
biddat’.  It was pointed out, that the Prophet Muhammad  considered only 
two forms of divorce to be valid, namely, ‘talaq-e-ah san’ and ‘talaq-e-hasan’. 
Despite there being numerous schools of Muslim juris prudence, only two 
schools recognized ‘talaq-e-biddat’ as a mode of divo rce.  It was submitted, 
that none of the Shia schools recognized triple talaq, a s a valid process of 
divorce between spouses.  Insofar as ‘talaq-e-biddat’  is concerned, it was 
asserted, that the Quran does not approve instantaneous ta laq.  During the 95 process of initiation of divorce and its finalization , it is necessarily to have a 
time lag and a timeline.  It cannot be instantaneous.  I t was pointed out, 
that the time lag is the period of ‘iddat’ for determinin g whether the wife is 
pregnant or not, i.e., for ascertaining the wife’s puri ty.  But the time line, is 
for adopting arbitration, to probe the possibility of re conciliation.  ‘Talaq-e-
biddat’, according to learned counsel, was a subseque nt improvisation, that 
had crept into the Hanafi school of Sunnis.  It was ass erted, that the British 
judges prior to independence, made a huge blunder by  upholding ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ – triple talaq.  Learned counsel placed relian ce on a number of 
judgments rendered by different High Courts, culminati ng in the recent 
judgments of three High Courts (-for details, refer to Part-6 – Judicial 
pronouncements, on the subject of ‘talaq-e-biddat’).   
60. Based on the above, it was asserted, that ‘talaq-e-b iddat’ could not 
be considered as a valid mode for severing matrimoni al ties under the 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  In view of the a bove submissions, and on 
a reiteration of the submissions advanced by learned counsel who had 
entered appearance prior to her, it was submitted, that the clear 
preponderance of judicial opinion after independence  of India has been, that 
Muslim ‘personal law’, does not approve ‘talaq-e-bidd at’, and therefore, in 
terms of the Muslim ‘personal law’, this Court should declare ‘talaq-e-
biddat’, as unacceptable in law, and should also decl are it as 
unconstitutional. 
61. Dr. Rajan Chandra and Mr. Arif Mohd. Khan, Advo cates, appeared 
on behalf of the Muslim Women Personal Law Board.  I t was their 96 contention, that it has been acknowledged by all concer ned, including the 
AIMPLB, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was derogatory to the dig nity of women, and 
that, it breaches the concept of gender equality.  It wa s submitted, that the 
above position could easily be remedied through judi cial intervention.  In 
this behalf, our attention was drawn to Article 13 of th e Constitution, which 
mandates, that all laws in force in the territory of Ind ia (immediately before 
the commencement of the Constitution), as were inconsis tent with the 
Fundamental Rights contained in Part III of the Constitutio n, were to the 
extent of such inconsistency, to be treated as void.  The above declaration, 
it was pointed out, had to be expressed through legisl ation, by the 
Parliament, and in case the Parliament was reluctant in  bringing out such a 
legislation (-presumably, for political consideration s), it was the bounden 
duty of this Court, to declare such existing laws whic h were derogatory to 
the dignity of women, and which violated the concept o f gender equality, as 
void, on account of their being in conflict with the fu ndamental rights 
contained in Part III of the Constitution. Both learned c ounsel, invited our 
attention to the legislative march of events commencing from the enactment 
of the Shariat Act in 1937, by the British rulers of I ndia, who took upon 
themselves, extreme cudgels to initiate the grant of appr opriate rights to 
women.  As also, the enactment of the Dissolution of M uslim Marriages Act, 
1939 (again during the British regime), whereby, Mus lim women were 
conferred with a right to divorce their husbands, on e ight distinct grounds.  
It was submitted, that the protection of Muslim women’s r ights, which 
needed to have continued even after independence, had  remained stagnant, 97 resulting in insurmountable sufferings to the Muslim wo men, specially in 
comparison with women of other faiths.  One of the gro unds of such 
suffering, it was pointed out, was surely ‘talaq-e-bidd at’ – triple talaq, which 
has been a matter of substantial furore and outcry at th e hands of Muslim 
women.  During the course of hearing, our attention was  drawn to 
fundamentals of Islam from the Quran (-for details, r efer to Part-3 – The 
Holy Quran – with reference to ‘talaq’), and ‘hadiths’ .  Views of Imams on 
‘fiqh’ and ‘hadith’ and other relevant texts were refer red to (as were also 
relied upon by learned counsel who appeared before them – and have been 
duly referred to above), to contend that triple talaq had never been accepted 
as a valid means of divorce, even under the Muslim ‘ personal law’.  Adopting 
the submissions of learned counsel, who had already assisted this Court on 
behalf of the petitioners, it was submitted, that this Court should declare 
‘talaq-e-biddat’, as unconstitutional and violative of Articles 14 and 15 of 
the Constitution. 
62. The learned Attorney General for India – Mr. Muku l Rohatgi 
commenced his submissions by contending, that in this c ase, this Court 
has been called upon to determine, whether the practic e of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
was compatible with contemporary constitutional morali ty and the 
principles of gender equality and gender equity gua ranteed under the 
Constitution.  In the context of the above debate, it was  submitted, that the 
pivotal issue that needed to be answered was, whether u nder a secular 
Constitution, Muslim women could be discriminated aga inst, merely by 
virtue of their religious identity.  And/or whether Mus lim women, could be 98 relegated to a status significantly more vulnerable tha n their counterparts 
who professed other faiths - Hindu, Christian, Zoroas trian, Buddhist, Sikh, 
Jain, etc..  In other words, the fundamental question fo r determination by 
this Court, according to learned Attorney General was,  whether in a secular 
democracy, religion can be a reason to deny equal sta tus and dignity, to 
Muslim women.  
63. In the above context, it was pointed out, that the fun damental right 
to equality guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constituti on, manifested 
within its fold, equality of status.  Gender equality,  gender equity and 
gender justice, it was submitted, were values intrinsica lly entwined in the 
guarantee of equality, under Article 14.  The conferm ent of a social status 
based on patriarchal values, or a social status based  on the mercy of the 
men-folk, it was contended, were absolutely incompatib le with the letter 
and spirit of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.   The rights of a Muslim 
woman to human dignity, social esteem and self-worth , it was submitted, 
were vital facets of a woman’s right to life with dign ity, under Article 21 of 
the Constitution.  It was submitted, that gender justice wa s a constitutional 
goal of overwhelming importance and magnitude, withou t accomplishing the 
same, half of the country’s citizenry, would not be ab le to enjoy to the fullest 
- their rights, status and opportunities. Reference was  also made to clause 
(e) of Article 51-A of the Constitution, which is extra cted below: 
“(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brothe rhood amongst 
all the people of India transcending religious, ling uistic and regional or 
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of 
women ;” 99 It was accordingly asserted, that Muslim women could n ot be subjected to 
arbitrary and unilateral whims of their husbands, as  in the case of divorce 
by triple talaq amongst Shia Muslims belonging to the H anafi school. 
64. It was submitted, that gender equality and the dignit y of women, 
were non-negotiable.  These rights were necessary, n ot only to realize the 
aspirations of every individual woman, who is an equ al citizen of this 
country, but also, for the larger well being of societ y and the progress of the 
nation, one half of which is made up by women.  It wa s submitted, that 
women deserved to be equal participants in the develop ment and 
advancement of the world’s largest democracy, and any practice which 
denudes the status of an inhabitant of India, merely by  virtue of the religion 
he/she happens to profess, must be considered as an i mpediment to that 
larger goal.  In this behalf, reliance was placed on  C. Masilamani Mudaliar 
v. Idol of Sri Swaminathaswami Thirukoil16 ,  wherein a 3-Judge Bench of 
this Court observed as under: 
“15. It is seen that if after the Constitution came into fo rce, the right to 
equality and dignity of person enshrined in the Prea mble of the 
Constitution, Fundamental Rights and Directive Principl es which are a 
trinity intended to remove discrimination or disabilit y on grounds only of 
social status or gender, removed the pre-existing impe diments that stood 
in the way of female or weaker segments of the society . In S.R. 
Bommai v. Union of India [(1994) 3 SCC 1] this Cour t held that the 
Preamble is part of the basic structure of the Constitu tion. Handicaps 
should be removed only under rule of law to enliven the trinity of justice, 
equality and liberty with dignity of person. The ba sic structure permeates 
equality of status and opportunity. The personal laws conferring inferior 
status on women is anathema to equality. Personal laws  are derived not 
from the Constitution but from the religious scriptures . The laws thus 
derived must be consistent with the Constitution lest they b ecome void 
under Article 13 if they violate fundamental rights. Rig ht to equality is a 
fundamental right ….  
                                                 
16  (1996) 8 SCC 525 100 16. The General Assembly of the United Nations adopted a declaration on 
4-12-1986 on “The Development of the Right to Developme nt” in which 
India played a crusading role for its adoption and r atified the same. Its 
preamble recognises that all human rights and fundamen tal freedoms 
are indivisible and interdependent . All Nation States are concerned at the 
existence of serious obstacles to development and comp lete fulfilment of 
human beings, denial of civil, political, economic, social and cultural 
rights. In order to promote development, equal attention  should be given 
to the implementation, promotion and protection of civil , political, 
economic, social and political rights. 
17. Article 1(1) assures right to development an inalie nable human right, 
by virtue of which every person and all people are entitled to participate 
in, contribute to, and enjoy economic, social, cultura l and political 
development in which all human rights and fundamental  freedoms can 
be fully realised. Article 6(1) obligates the State to observance of all 
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all withou t any 
discrimination as to race, sex, language or religion . Sub-article (2) 
enjoins that … equal attention and urgent consideration s hould be given 
to implement, promotion and protection of civil, politica l, economic, 
social and political rights. Sub-article (3) thereof en joins that: 
“State should take steps to eliminate obstacle to developm ent, 
resulting from failure to observe civil and political  rights as well as 
economic, social and economic rights. Article 8 casts  duty on the State to 
undertake, … necessary measures for the realisation of  right to 
development and ensure, inter alia, equality of oppor tunity for all in their 
access to basic resources … and distribution of income .” 
Effective measures should be undertaken to ensure that women have an 
active role in the development process. Appropriate eco nomic and social 
reforms should be carried out with a view to eradicat e all social injustice. 
18. Human rights are derived from the dignity and wor th inherent in the 
human person. Human rights and fundamental freedom h ave been 
reiterated by the Universal Declaration of Human Righ ts. Democracy, 
development and respect for human rights and fundamen tal freedoms 
are interdependent and have mutual reinforcement. The  human rights 
for women, including girl child are, therefore, inal ienable, integral and 
indivisible part of universal human rights. The full development of 
personality and fundamental freedoms and equal partic ipation by women 
in political, social, economic and cultural life are concomitants for 
national development, social and family stability and growth, culturally, 
socially and economically. All forms of discriminati on on grounds of 
gender is violative of fundamental freedoms and human  rights .” 
 
Reference was also made to Anuj Garg v. Hotel Associa tion of India 17 , 
wherein it was submitted, that this Court had emphasized o n the value of 
                                                 
17  (2008) 3 SCC 1 101 gender equality, and the need to discard patriarchal m indset.  For arriving 
at the above conclusion, it was submitted, that this Court had relied upon 
international jurisprudence, to strike down a law which  debarred women 
from employment on the pretext that the object of the law was, to afford 
them protection.  The Court held that “it is for the cou rt to review that the 
majoritarian impulses rooted in moralistic tradition do  not impinge upon 
individual autonomy (of the women)”.  The Court also  quoted from a 
judgment of the U.S. Supreme Court where discriminatio n was rationalized 
“by an attitude of ‘romantic paternalism’ which, in prac tical effect, put 
women, not on a pedestal, but in a cage…”.  Reference was also made to 
Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan 18 , wherein, in the context of protection of 
women against sexual harassment at  the workplace, this Court underlined 
the right of women to a life with dignity. Additionally , our attention was 
drawn to the Charu Khurana case 15, wherein it was concluded, that the 
“sustenance of gender justice is the cultivated achievem ent of intrinsic 
human rights and that there cannot be any discrimination solely on the 
ground of gender.”  The learned Attorney General als o cited, Githa 
Hariharan v. Reserve Bank of India 19 , wherein this Court had the occasion 
to interpret the provisions of the  Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 
1956.  It was submitted, that this Court in the above judg ment emphasized 
the necessity to take measures to bring domestic law in line with 
international conventions, so as to eradicate discrimin ation of all forms, 
against women.  It was submitted, that Articles 14, 15 and  21 consituted an 
                                                 
18  (1997) 6 SCC 241  
19  (1999) 2 SCC 228 102 inseparable part of the basic structure of the Constitut ion.  These values – 
the right to equality, non-discrimination and the righ t to live life with 
dignity, it was emphasized, formed the bedrock of the Constitution.  Gender 
equality and dignity for women, it was pointed out, wa s an inalienable and 
inseparable part of the basic structure of the Constitu tion.  Since women 
transcend all social barriers, it was submitted, that the  most fundamental 
facet of equality under the Constitution was gender eq uality, and gender 
equity. 
65. The learned Attorney General also pointed out, that a large number 
of Islamic theocratic countries and countries with overw helmingly large 
Muslim populations, had undertaken significant reform s including the 
practice of triple talaq.  These societies had accepted  reform, as being 
consistent with the practice of Islam (-for details, re fer to Part-5 – 
Abrogation of the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ by legis lation, the world over, in 
Islamic, as well as, non-Islamic States).  The parad ox was that, Muslim 
women in India, were more vulnerable in their social  status as against 
women even in predominantly Islamic States, even thoug h India is a secular 
country.  It was submitted, that the position of Indian M uslim women was 
much worst, than Muslim women who live in theocratic s ocieties, or 
countries where Islam is the State religion.  It was c ontended, that the 
impugned practice was repugnant to the guarantee of sec ularism, which it 
was pointed out, was an essential feature of the Constitu tion.  Perpetuation 
of regressive or unjust practices in the name of reli gion, it was submitted, 
was anathema to a secular Constitution, which guarantee s non- 103 discrimination on grounds of religion.  It was also submitted, that in the 
context of gender equality and gender equity, the larg er goal of the State 
was, to strive towards the establishment of a social demo cracy, where each 
one was equal to all others.  Reference in this behal f was made to the 
closing speech on the draft Constitution on 25 th  November, 1949, of Dr. 
Ambedkar who had stated: “What we must do is not to be atta ined with 
mere political democracy; we must make out political  democracy and a 
social democracy as well.  Political democracy canno t last unless there lies 
on the base of it a social democracy.”  A social dem ocracy has been 
described as “A way of life which recognizes libert y, equality and fraternity 
as principles of life”.  It was therefore submitted, tha t in order to achieve 
social democracy, and  in order to provide social an d economic justice 
(envisaged in the preamble), namely, goals articulated  in the fundamental 
rights and directive principles, and in particular, A rticles 14, 15, 16, 21, 38, 
39 and 46, had to be given effect to.  In the instant con text, the learned 
Attorney General placed reliance on Valsamma Paul v.  Cochin University 20 , 
and drew the Court’s attention to the following: 
“16.The Constitution seeks to establish secular sociali st democratic 
republic in which every citizen has equality of status  and of opportunity, 
to promote among the people dignity of the individual, unity and integrity 
of the nation transcending them from caste, sectional, re ligious barriers 
fostering fraternity among them in an integrated Bhar at . The emphasis, 
therefore, is on a citizen to improve excellence and e qual status and 
dignity of person. With the advancement of human rights  and 
constitutional philosophy of social and economic demo cracy in a 
democratic polity to all the citizens on equal footing,  secularism has been 
held to be one of the basic features of the Constitution (Vide: S.R. 
Bommai v. Union of India, (1994) 3 SCC 1 and egalita rian social order is 
its foundation. Unless free mobility of the people is allowed transcending 
                                                 
20  (1996) 3 SCC 545 104 sectional, caste, religious or regional barriers, esta blishment of secular 
socialist order becomes difficult . In State of Karnataka v. Appu Balu 
Ingale & Ors., AIR (1993) SC 1126 this Court has held  in paragraph 34 
that judiciary acts as a bastion of the freedom and of  the rights of the 
people. The Judges are participants in the living stre am of national life, 
steering the law between the dangers of rigidity and f ormlessness in the 
seemless web of life. Judge must be a jurist endowed with the legislator's 
wisdom, historian's search for truth, prophet's vision , capacity to 
respond to the needs of the present, resilience to cope  with the demands 
of the future to decide objectively, disengaging himsel f/herself from every 
personal influence or predilections . The Judges should adapt purposive 
interpretation of the dynamic concepts under the Constitu tion and the 
act with its interpretive armoury to articulate the felt ne cessities of the 
time. Social legislation is not a document for fastidiou s dialects but 
means of ordering the life of the people. To construe law one must enter 
into its spirit, its setting and history. Law should be c apable to expand 
freedom of the people and the legal order can weigh w ith utmost equal 
care to provide the underpinning of the highly inequita ble social order. 
Judicial review must be exercised with insight into social values to 
supplement the changing social needs. The existing soc ial inequalities or 
imbalances are required to be removed readjusting the social order 
through rule of law .…” 
 
The learned Attorney General then submitted, that in para graph 20 of the 
Valsamma Paul case 20 , it was noted, that various Hindu practices which 
were not in tune with the times, had been done away wi th, in the interest of 
promoting equality and fraternity.  In paragraph 21 of the above judgment, 
this Court had emphasized the need to divorce religion from ‘personal law’.  
And in paragraph 22, a mention was made about the nee d to foster a 
national identity, which would not deny pluralism of I ndian culture, but 
would rather preserve it.  Relevant extracts of the afore said judgment relied 
upon during the course of hearing, are reproduced he rein below: 
“21. The Constitution through its Preamble, Fundamental Rights and 
Directive Principles created secular State based on the  principle of 
equality and non-discrimination striking a balance b etween the rights of 
the individuals and the duty and commitment of the State to  establish 
an egalitarian social order . Dr. K.M. Munshi contended on the floor of 
the Constituent Assembly that  "we want to divorce religion from personal 
law, from what may be called social relations, or fro m the rights of 105 parties as regards inheritance or succession. What hav e these things got 
to do with religion, I fail to understand? We are in a  stage where we must 
unify and consolidate the nation by every means witho ut interfering with 
religious practices. If, however, in the past, religio us practices have been 
so construed as to cover the whole field of life, we h ave reached a point 
when we must put our foot down and say that these matters  are not 
religion, they are purely matters for secular legisl ation. Religion must be 
restricted to spheres which legitimately appertain to rel igion, and the rest 
of life must be regulated, unified and modified in su ch a manner that we 
may evolve, as early as possible, a strong and conso lidated nation " (Vide: 
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII 356-8). 
22. In the onward march of establishing an egalitarian  secular social 
order based on equality and dignity of person, Artic le 15(1) prohibits 
discrimination on grounds of religion or caste identi ties so as to foster 
national identity which does not deny pluralism of Ind ian culture but 
rather to preserve it. Indian culture is a product or b lend of several 
strains or elements derived from various sources, in spite of 
inconsequential variety of forms and types. There is  unity of spirit 
informing Indian culture throughout the ages. It is this  underlying unity 
which is one of the most remarkable everlasting and en during feature of 
Indian culture that fosters unity in diversity among di fferent populace. 
This generates and fosters cordial spirit and tolerati on that make 
possible the unity and continuity of Indian traditions . Therefore, it would 
be the endeavour of everyone to develop several identi ties which 
constantly interact and overlap, and prove a meeting poi nt for all 
members of different religious communities, castes, s ections, sub-
sections and regions to promote rational approach to l ife and society and 
would establish a national composite and cosmopolitan c ulture and way 
of life .” 
 
66. It was also asserted, that patriarchal values and tr aditional notions 
about the role of women in society, were an impedimen t to the goal for 
achieving social democracy.  In this behalf it was co ntended, that gender 
inequity impacts not only women, but had a ripple effe ct on the rest of the 
community, preventing it from shaking out of backward ness and partaking 
to the full, liberties guaranteed under the Constitution .  Citizens from all 
communities, it was submitted, had the right to the enjoym ent of all the 
constitutional guarantees, and if some sections of soci ety were held back, it 
was likely to hold back the community at large, resulti ng in a lopsided 106 development, with pockets of social backwardness. Acc ording to the learned 
Attorney General, this kind of lopsided development wa s not in the larger 
interest of the integrity and development of the nation.  It was submitted, 
that secularism, equality and fraternity being the ove rarching guiding 
principles of all communities, must be given effect to.   This would move the 
entire citizenry forward, guaranteeing to women equal rights, and at the 
same time, preserving diversity and plurality.   
67. It was the emphatic assertion of the learned Attorney  General, that 
freedom of religion was subservient to fundamental rig hts.  It was 
contended in this behalf, that the words employed in Arti cle 25(1) of the 
Constitution, which conferred the right to practice, pr each and propagate 
religion were “subject to the provisions of this Part” , which meant that the 
above rights are subject to Articles 14 and 15, which g uarantee equality and 
non-discrimination.  In other words, under India’s s ecular Constitution, the 
right to freedom of religion was subject to, and in th at sense, subservient to 
other fundamental rights – such as the right to equality , the right to non-
discrimination, and the right to life with dignity.  In this behalf reference 
was made to Sri Venkataramana Devaru v. State of Mysore21 .  In this 
judgment, it was submitted, that this Court considered th e meaning of the 
phrase “subject to the provisions of this Part” in Artic le 25(1) to conclude, 
that the other provisions of the Part would “prevail ov er” and would “control 
the right conferred” by Article 25(1). 
                                                 
21  1958 SCR 895 107 68. In the above context it was also submitted, that the f reedom of 
religion, expressed in Article 25 of the Constitution  was, not confined to the 
male gender.  Article 25 is extracted below: 
“25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, pra ctice and propagation 
of religion. – (1) Subject to public order, morality and health and to the 
other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally  entitled to freedom of 
conscience and the right freely to profess, practise a nd propagate 
religion. 
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation o f any existing law or 
prevent the State from making any law –  
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial , political or other 
secular activity which may be associated with religio us practice; 
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the th rowing open of Hindu 
religious institutions of a public character to all c lasses and sections of 
Hindus.  
Explanation I.-  The wearing and carrying of kirpans  shall be deemed to 
be included in the profession of the Sikh religion. 
Explanation II.- In sub-clause (b) of clause referen ce to Hindus shall be 
construed as including a reference to persons profess ing the Sikh, Jaina 
or Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu relig ious institutions 
shall be construed accordingly.” 
 
It was highlighted, that it was also necessary to note, th at Article 25(1) 
provides that “all” persons were “equally” entitled to t he freedom of 
conscience, and the right to profess, practice and prop agate religion.  This, 
according to the learned Attorney General, should be un derstood to mean, 
that the rights conferred by this article were equally a vailable to women, 
and were not confined to men alone.  Therefore, it was  contended, that any 
patriarchal or one sided interpretation of religion (or  a practice of religion), 
ought not to be countenanced.   
69. It was emphasised by the learned Attorney General,  that it was 
necessary to draw a line between religion per se, and religious practices.  It 
was submitted, that the latter were not protected under Ar ticle 25. 108 “Religion”, according to the learned Attorney General,  has been explained by 
this Court in A.S. Narayana Deekshitulu v. State of A.P . 22 , as under : 
“86. A religion undoubtedly has its basis in a system of beliefs and 
doctrine which are regarded by those who profess reli gion to be 
conducive to their spiritual well-being.  A religion is not merely an 
opinion, doctrine or belief.  It has outward expressi on in acts as well.  It 
is not every aspect of religion that has been safeguard ed by Articles 25 
and 26 nor has the Constitution provided that every re ligious activity 
cannot be interfered with.  Religion, therefore, canno t be construed in 
the context of Articles 25 and 26 in its strict and etymol ogical sense.  
Every religion must believe in a conscience and ethi cal and moral 
precepts.  Therefore, whatever binds a man to his own  conscience and 
whatever moral or ethical principles regulate the live s of men believing in 
that theistic, conscience or religious belief that alone can constitute 
religion as understood in the Constitution which foster s feeling of 
brotherhood, amity, fraternity and equality of all p ersons which find their 
foothold in secular aspect of the Constitution .  Secular activities and 
aspects do not constitute religion which brings under i ts own cloak every 
human activity.  There is nothing which a man can do , whether in the 
way of wearing clothes or food or drink, which is no t considered a 
religious activity.  Every mundane or human activity  was not intended to 
be protected by the Constitution under the guise of re ligion.  The 
approach to construe the protection of religion or mat ters of religion or 
religious practices guaranteed by Articles 25 and 26 must be viewed with 
pragmatism since by the very nature of things, it would be extremely 
difficult, if not impossible, to define the expression  religion or matters of 
religion or religious belief or practice .   
87. In pluralistic society like India, as stated earl ier, there are numerous 
religious groups who practise diverse forms of worsh ip or practise 
religions, rituals, rites etc., even among Hindus, di fferent denominants 
and sects residing within the country or abroad profe ss different 
religious faiths, beliefs, practices.  They seek to i dentify religion with 
what may in substance be mere facets of religion.  I t would, therefore, be 
difficult to devise a definition of religion which wo uld be regarded as 
applicable to all religions or matters of religious pr actices.  To one class 
of persons a mere dogma or precept or a doctrine may be predominant in 
the matter of religion; to others, rituals or ceremonies  may be 
predominant facets of religion; and to yet another clas s or persons a code 
of conduct or a mode of life may constitute religion .  Even to different 
persons professing the same religious faith some of th e facets or religion 
may have varying significance.  It may not be possibl e, therefore, to 
devise a precise definition of universal application  as to what is religion 
and what are matters of religious belief or religious  practice.  That is far 
from saying that it is not possible to state with reasona ble certainty the 
                                                 
22  (1996) 9 SCC 548 109 limits within which the Constitution conferred a right to profess religion.  
Therefore, the right to religion guaranteed under Articl e 25 or 26 is not 
an absolute or unfettered right to propagating religion which is subject to 
legislation by the State limiting or regulating any activi ty – economic, 
financial, political or secular which are associated  with religious belief, 
faith, practice or custom .  They are subject to reform on social welfare by 
appropriate legislation by the State.  Though religious  practices and 
performances of acts in pursuance of religious belie f are as much a part 
of religion as faith or belief in a particular doctri ne, that by itself is not 
conclusive or decisive.   What are essential parts of religion or religious 
belief or matters or religion and religious practice is essentially a 
question of fact to be considered in the context in whic h the question has 
arisen and the evidence – factual or legislative or hi storic – presented in 
that context is required to be considered and a decision  reached .” 
 
In order to support the above view, the Court’s attention  was also drawn to 
the Javed case 10 , wherein this Court observed as under : 
“49. In State of Bombay v. Narasu Appa Mali [AIR 1952  Bom 84:53 Cri 
LJ 354] the constitutional validity of the Bombay Prev ention of Hindu 
Bigamous Marriages Act (25 of 1946) was challenged o n the ground of 
violation of Articles 14, 15 and 25 of the Constitutio n. A Division Bench, 
consisting of Chief Justice Chagla and Justice Gajend ragadkar (as His 
Lordship then was), held:  
“A sharp distinction must be drawn between religious faith and belief 
and religious practices. What the State protects is reli gious faith and 
belief. If religious practices run counter to public o rder, morality or 
health or a policy of social welfare upon which the State has embarked, 
then the religious practices must give way before the go od of the people 
of the State as a whole .” 
50 . Their Lordships quoted from American decisions that th e laws are 
made for the governance of actions, and while they can not interfere with 
mere religious beliefs and opinions, they may with pr actices. Their 
Lordships found it difficult to accept the proposition that polygamy is an 
integral part of Hindu religion though Hindu religion recognizes the 
necessity of a son for religious efficacy and spiri tual salvation. However, 
proceeding on an assumption that polygamy is a recogn ized institution 
according to Hindu religious practice, Their Lordshi ps stated in no 
uncertain terms:  
“The right of the State to legislate on questions relatin g to marriage 
cannot be disputed. Marriage is undoubtedly a social i nstitution an 
institution in which the State is vitally interested. Al though there may 
not be universal recognition of the fact, still a very l arge volume of 
opinion in the world today admits that monogamy is a v ery desirable and 
praiseworthy institution. If, therefore, the State of Bom bay compels 
Hindus to become monogamists, it is a measure of soci al reform, and if it 
is a measure of social reform then the State is empowe red to legislate 110 with regard to social reform under Article 25(2)( b) notwithstanding the 
fact that it may interfere with the right of a citizen free ly to profess, 
practise and propagate religion.” 
 
It was further submitted, that practices such as polygamy cannot be 
described as being sanctioned by religion, inasmuch  as, historically 
polygamy prevailed across communities for several ce nturies, including the 
ancient Greeks and Romans, Hindus, Jews and Zoroastri ans.  It was 
pointed out, that polygamy had less to do with religion, and more to do with 
social norms of that time.  In the Quran as well, it wa s contended, it 
appears that the prevalence (or perhaps, rampant practic e) of polygamy in 
pre-Islamic society, was sought to be regulated and re stricted, so as to treat 
women better than they were treated in pre-Islamic tim es.  It was 
submitted, that the practice of polygamy was a social pra ctice rather than a 
religious one, and therefore, would not be protected under Article 25.  It was 
sought to be explained, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was simila rly a practice never 
clearly recognized, nor was it seen with favour, and needed to be examined 
in the background of the above narrated historic posit ion.    
70. In order to be able to seek interference, with refe rence to the issue 
canvassed, and in order to surmount the legal object i n advancing his 
contentions, the learned Attorney General pointed out, that there was an 
apparent misconstruction, which had led to the conclusi ons drawn by the 
Bombay High Court, in State of Bombay v. Narasu Appa M ali23 .  It was 
submitted, that ‘personal laws’ ought to be examined, in  the light of the 
overarching goal of gender justice, and dignity of women.  The underlying 
                                                 
23  AIR 1952 Bom. 84 111 idea behind the preservation of ‘personal laws’ was, to safeguard the 
plurality and diversity among the people of India.  However, the sustenance 
of such diverse identities, according to the learned  Attorney General, cannot 
be a pretext for denying women their rightful status an d gender equality.  It 
was submitted, that ‘personal law’ was a part and parcel  of “law” within the 
meaning of Article 13.  And therefore, any such law (‘personal law’) which 
was inconsistent with fundamental rights, would have to be considered 
void.  It was further submitted, that the interpretation of the Bombay High 
Court in the Narasu Appa Mali case 23 , to the effect that Article 13 of the 
Constitution, would not cover ‘personal laws’ warrant ed reconsideration.  
Firstly, it was contended, that a reading of the plain l anguage adopted in 
Article 13 would clearly establish that ‘personal law’,  as well as customs 
and usages, were covered within the scope of “law”.  Article 13 reads as 
under:  
“13. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fu ndamental rights.- 
(1) All laws in force in the territory of India imme diately before the 
commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they ar e inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of  such 
inconsistency, be void. 
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the 
rights conferred by this Part and any law made in con travention of this 
clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void .  
(3)  In this article, unless the context otherwise requir es,- 
(a)  “law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye law, rule , regulation, 
notification, custom or usage having in the territory  of India the force of 
law;  
(b) “laws in force” includes laws passed or made by a L egislature or 
other competent authority in the territory of India be fore the 
commencement of this Constitution and not previously re pealed, 
notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof may not be then 
in operation either at all or in particular areas . 
(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any amend ment of this 
Constitution made under article 368.” 112 It was submitted, that the meaning of “law” as defined i n clauses (2) and (3) 
of Article 13 is not exhaustive, and should be read a s if it encompassed 
within its scope, ‘personal law’ as well.  It was sub mitted, that under clause 
(2) of Article 246 of the Constitution, Parliament and S tate Legislatures had 
the power to make laws, also on the subject enumerated in entry 5 of the 
Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule, pertaining to “M arriage and 
divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills; intestac y and succession; joint 
family and partition; all matters in respect of which p arties in judicial 
proceedings were immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution subject to their personal law.”  Since the  subjects expressed in 
entry 5 aforementioned, were relatable to ‘personal law ’, therefore, ‘personal 
law’, according to the learned Attorney General, was l iable to include law 
within the meaning of sub-clause (a) of clause (3) o f Article 13 of the 
Constitution. The observations of the Bombay High Cour t in the Narasu 
Appa Mali case 23 , it was contended, were contrary to the plain language  of 
Article 13.  Secondly, it was submitted, the plain langu age of Article 13(3)(a) 
which defines “law” as including “any…custom or usag e having in the 
territory of India the force of law”, left no room fo r any doubt, on the issue.  
It was pointed out, that the observations in the Narasu A ppa Mali case 23 , 
were in the nature of obiter, and could not be considered as the ratio of the 
judgment.  Further more, the said judgment, being a judgment of a High 
Court, was not binding on this Court.  Without prejudic e to the above, 
according to the learned Attorney General, the said pra ctices under 
challenge had been incorporated into the Muslim ‘pers onal law’ by the 113 Shariat Act.  It was reasoned, that the Shariat Act, was c learly a “law in 
force”, within the meaning of Article 13(3)(b).  It w as submitted, that the 
petitioner has challenged Section 2 of the aforesaid Ac t, insofar as it 
recognises and validates the practices of triple talaq o r talaq-e-biddat (nikah 
halala and polygamy).  Therefore, even assuming (fo r the sake of argument), 
that these practices do not constitute customs, the same w ere nonetheless 
manifestly covered by Article 13.   
71. It was acknowledged, that the legal position express ed in the 
Narasu Appa Mali case 23  had been affirmed by this Court, on various 
occasions.  Rather than recording the learned Attorney General’s 
submissions in our words, we would extract the positi on acknowledged in 
the written submissions filed on behalf of the Union o f India, in this matter, 
below: 
“(e) Pertinently, despite this ruling that was later foll owed in Krishna 
Singh v. Mathura Ahir, (1981) 3 SCC 689 and Maharshi  Avdhesh v. 
Union of India, (1994) Supp (1) SCC 713, the Supreme  Court has actively 
tested personal laws on the touchstone of fundamental  rights in cases 
such as Daniel Latifi v. Union of India, (2001) 7 SC C 740 (5-Judge 
Bench), Mohd. Ahmed Khan v. Shah Bano Begum, (1985)  2 SCC 556 (5-
Judge Bench), John Vallamatom v. Union of India, (20 03) 6 SCC 611 (3-
Judge Bench) etc.  Furher, in Masilamani Mudaliar v.  Idol of Sri 
Swaminathaswami Thirukoil, (1996) 8 SCC 525, …..” 
 
However, reference was nevertheless made to the Masila mani Mudaliar 
case 16 , wherein, it was submitted, that this Court had adopted a contrary 
position to the Narasu Appa Mali case 23  and had held, “But the right to 
equality, removing handicaps and discrimination aga inst a Hindu female by 
reason of operation of existing law should be in con formity with the right to 
equality enshrined in the Constitution and the persona l law also needs to 114 be in conformity with the constitutional goal.” It was also asserted, that this 
Court had further held, “Personal laws are derived not from the 
Constitution but from the religious scriptures.  The la ws thus derived must 
be consistent with the Constitution lest they become void under Article 13 if 
they violate fundamental rights.”  It is significant to note, that this case 
concerned the inheritance rights of Hindu women.  In v iew of the aforesaid, 
it was submitted, that the observations in the Narasu Appa  Mali case 23 , that 
‘personal law’ was not covered under Article 13, was incorrect and not 
binding upon this Court. 
72. It was also contended, that the Constitution undoubtedl y accords 
guarantee of faith and belief to every citizen, but eve ry practice of faith 
could not be held to be an integral part of religion an d belief.  It was 
therefore submitted, that every sustainable (and enforcea ble) religious 
practice, must satisfy the overarching constitutional g oal, of gender 
equality, gender justice and dignity.  It was assert ed, that the practice of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’, could not be regarded as a part of an y “essential religious 
practice”, and as such, could not be entitled to the prote ction of Article 25.  
The test of what amounts to an essential religious pra ctice, it was 
submitted, was laid down in a catena of judgments inclu ding 
Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra 
Thirtha Swamiar of Shirur Mutt 24 , wherein this Court held as under: 
“20. The contention formulated in such broad terms cann ot, we think, be 
supported. In the first place, what constitutes the essen tial part of a 
religion is primarily to be ascertained with referenc e to the doctrines of 
that religion itself. If the tenets of any religious sec t of the Hindus 
                                                 
24  AIR 1954 SC 282 115 prescribe that offerings of food should be given to th e idol at particular 
hours of the day, that periodical ceremonies should be  performed in a 
certain way at certain periods of the year or that there should be daily 
recital of sacred texts or oblations to the sacred fire , all these would be 
regarded as parts of religion and the mere fact that th ey involve 
expenditure of money or employment of priests and serv ants or the use 
of marketable commodities would not make them secular  activities 
partaking of a commercial or economic character; all of them are 
religious practices and should be regarded as matters  of religion within 
the meaning of Article 26(b) . What Article 25(2)(a) contemplates is not 
regulation by the State of religious practices as such, the freedom of 
which is guaranteed by the Constitution except when they  run counter to 
public order, health and morality but regulation of a ctivities which are 
economic, commercial or political in their character  though they are 
associated with religious practices. We may refer in this connection to a 
few American and Australian cases, all of which aros e out of the 
activities of persons connected with the religious ass ociation known as 
“Jehova's Witnesses”. This association of persons lo osely organised 
throughout Australia, U.S.A. and other countries regard the literal 
interpretation of the Bible as fundamental to proper re ligious beliefs. 
This belief in the supreme authority of the Bible colo urs many of their 
political ideas. They refuse to take oath of allegiance  to the king or other 
constituted human authority and even to show respect to  the national 
flag, and they decry all wars between nations and all  kinds of war 
activities. In 1941 a company of “Jehova's Witnesses” incorporated in 
Australia commenced proclaiming and teaching matters w hich were 
prejudicial to war activities and the defence of the Co mmonwealth and 
steps were taken against them under the National Securi ty Regulations 
of the State. The legality of the action of the Governme nt was questioned 
by means of a writ petition before the High Court and th e High Court 
held that the action of the Government was justified and that Section 
116, which guaranteed freedom of religion under the A ustralian 
Constitution, was not in any way infringed by the Natio nal Security 
Regulations  (Vide Adelaide Company v. Commonwealth, 67 CLR 116,  
127). These were undoubtedly political activities thou gh arising out of 
religious belief entertained by a particular communit y. In such cases, as 
Chief Justice Latham pointed out, the provision for prot ection of religion 
was not an absolute protection to be interpreted and app lied 
independently of other provisions of the Constitution. These privileges 
must be reconciled with the right of the State to employ the sovereign 
power to ensure peace, security and orderly living w ithout which 
constitutional guarantee of civil liberty would be a m ockery .” 116 Reference was then made to Ratilal v. State of Bombay 25 , wherein it was 
observed as under:  
“13. Religious practices or performances of acts in p ursuance of religious 
belief are as much a part of religion as faith or bel ief in particular 
doctrines. Thus if the tenets of the Jain or the Parsi religion lay down 
that certain rites and ceremonies are to be performed at certain times 
and in a particular manner, it cannot be said that the se are secular 
activities partaking of commercial or economic characte r simply because 
they involve expenditure of money or employment of pr iests or the use of 
marketable commodities. No outside authority has any ri ght to say that 
these are not essential parts of religion and it is not o pen to the secular 
authority of the State to restrict or prohibit them in any manner they like 
under the guise of administering the trust estate . Of course, the scale of 
expenses to be incurred in connection with these reli gious observances 
may be and is a matter of administration of property b elonging to 
religious institutions; and if the expenses on these he ads are likely to 
deplete the endowed properties or affect the stability o f the institution, 
proper control can certainly be exercised by State agen cies as the law 
provides. We may refer in this connection to the obser vation of Davar, J. 
in the case of Jamshed ji v. Soonabai [33 Bom 122] and although they 
were made in a case where the question was whether the bequest of 
property by a Parsi testator for the purpose of perpet ual celebration of 
ceremonies like Muktad baj, Vyezashni, etc., which a re sanctioned by the 
Zoroastrian religion were valid charitable gifts, the o bservations, we 
think, are quite appropriate for our present purpose. “ If this is the belief 
of the community” thus observed the learned Judge, “an d it is proved 
undoubtedly to be the belief of the Zoroastrian communi ty,—a secular 
Judge is bound to accept that belief—it is not for him to sit in judgment 
on that belief, he has no right to interfere with the co nscience of a donor 
who makes a gift in favour of what he believes to be th e advancement of 
his religion and the welfare of his community or man kind”. These 
observations do, in our opinion, afford an indication  of the measure of 
protection that is given by Article 26(b) of our Constit ution .” 
 
Our attention was also drawn to Qureshi v. State of Biha r 26 , wherein this 
Court held as under:  
“13. Coming now to the arguments as to the violation of  the petitioners' 
fundamental rights, it will be convenient to take up fir st the complaint 
founded on Article 25(1). That article runs as follows : 
                                                 
25  AIR 1954 SC 388  
26  AIR 1958 SC 731 117 “Subject to public order, morality and health and to t he other provisions 
of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freed om of conscience and 
the right freely to profess, practice and propagate reli gion.” 
After referring to the provisions of clause (2) which  lays down certain 
exceptions which are not material for our present purp ose this Court 
has, in Ratilal Panachand Gandhi v. The State of Bomb ay [(1954) SCR 
1055, 1062-1063] explained the meaning and scope of this article thus: 
“Thus, subject to the restrictions which this article impo ses, every person 
has a fundamental right under our Constitution not mere ly to entertain 
such religious belief as may be approved of by his judgment or 
conscience but to exhibit his belief and section also v iolates the 
fundamental rights of the petitioners ideas in such ove rt acts as are 
enjoined or sanctioned by his religion and further to propagate his 
religious views for the edification of others. It is im material also whether 
the propagation is made by a person in his individual  capacity or on 
behalf of any church or institution. The free exerci se of religion by which 
is meant the performance of outward acts in pursuance of religious 
belief, is, as stated above, subject to State regulation imposed to secure 
order, public health and morals of the people .” 
What then, we inquire, are the materials placed before  us to substantiate 
the claim that the sacrifice of a cow is enjoined or s anctioned by Islam? 
The materials before us are extremely meagre and it i s surprising that on 
a matter of this description the allegations in the petition  should be so 
vague. In the Bihar Petition No. 58 of 1956 are set ou t the following bald 
allegations: 
“That the petitioners further respectfully submit that the  said impugned 
guaranteed under Article 25 of the Constitution in-as-m uch as on the 
occasion of their Bakr Id Day, it is the religious practice of the 
petitioners' community to sacrifice a cow on the said occasion. The poor 
members of the community usually sacrifice one cow f or every 7 
members whereas it would require one sheep or one go at for each 
member which would entail considerably more expense.  As a result of 
the total ban imposed by the impugned section the petition ers would not 
even be allowed to make the said sacrifice which is a  practice and 
custom in their religion, enjoined upon them by the Ho ly Quran, and 
practised by all Muslims from time immemorial and rec ognised as such 
in India .” 
The allegations in the other petitions are similar. Thes e are met by an 
equally bald denial in paragraph 21 of the affidavit in opposition. No 
affidavit has been filed by any person specially com petent to expound the 
relevant tenets of Islam. No reference is made in the  petition to any 
particular Surah of the Holy Quran which, in terms, re quires the 
sacrifice of a cow. All that was placed before us dur ing the argument 
were Surah XXII, Verses 28 and 33, and Surah CVIII.  What the Holy 
book enjoins is that people should pray unto the Lord and make 
sacrifice. We have no affidavit before us by any Mau lana explaining the 
implications of those verses or throwing any light on t his problem. We, 118 however, find it laid down in Hamilton's translation o f Hedaya Book XLIII 
at p. 592 that it is the duty of every free Mussulman, a rrived at the age of 
maturity, to offer a sacrifice on the Yd Kirban, or f estival of the sacrifice, 
provided he be then possessed of Nisab and be not a traveller. The 
sacrifice established for one person is a goat and tha t for seven a cow or 
a camel. It is therefore, optional for a Muslim to sac rifice a goat for one 
person or a cow or a camel for seven persons. It doe s not appear to be 
obligatory that a person must sacrifice a cow . The very fact of an option 
seems to run counter to the notion of an obligatory dut y. It is, however, 
pointed out that a person with six other members of his f amily may 
afford to sacrifice a cow but may not be able to affo rd to sacrifice seven 
goats. So there may be an economic compulsion althou gh there is no 
religious compulsion. It is also pointed out that fro m time immemorial 
the Indian Mussalmans have been sacrificing cows and  this practice, if 
not enjoined, is certainly sanctioned by their religion  and it amounts to 
their practice of religion protected by Article 25. Wh ile the petitioners 
claim that the sacrifice of a cow is essential, the State  denies the 
obligatory nature of the religious practice. The fact,  emphasised by the 
respondents, cannot be disputed, namely, that many Mussa lmans do not 
sacrifice a cow on the Bakr Id Day. It is part of the k nown history of 
India that the Moghul Emperor Babar saw the wisdom of prohibiting the 
slaughter of cows as and by way of religious sacrifi ce and directed his 
son Humayun to follow this example. Similarly Emperor s Akbar, 
Jehangir, and Ahmad Shah, it is said, prohibited cow slaughter. Nawab 
Hyder Ali of Mysore made cow slaughter an offence pu nishable with the 
cutting of the hands of the offenders. Three of the mem bers of the 
Gosamvardhan Enquiry Committee set up by the Uttar Prade sh 
Government in 1953 were Muslims and concurred in the unanimous 
recommendation for total ban on slaughter of cows. We have, however, 
no material on the record before us which will enable  us to say, in the 
face of the foregoing facts, that the sacrifice of a cow  on that day is an 
obligatory overt act for a Mussalman to exhibit his rel igious belief and 
idea. In the premises, it is not possible for us to up hold this claim of the 
petitioners .” 
 
Learned Attorney General also cited, State of Gujarat v.  Mirzapur Moti 
Kureshi Kassab Jamat 27 , and placed reliance on the following observations: 
“22. In State of W.B. v. Ashutosh Lahiri [(1995) 1 SC C 189] this Court 
has noted that sacrifice of any animal by Muslims for the religious 
purpose on BakrI'd does not include slaughtering of c ows as the only 
way of carrying out that sacrifice. Slaughtering of cow s on BakrI'd is 
neither essential to nor necessarily required as part of the religious 
ceremony. An optional religious practice is not cover ed by Article 25(1) . 
On the contrary, it is common knowledge that the cow and its progeny 
                                                 
27  (2005) 8 SCC 534 119 i.e. bull, bullocks and calves are worshipped by Hi ndus on specified days 
during Diwali and other festivals like Makar Sankranti  and Gopashtmi. A 
good number of temples are to be found where the statue  of “Nandi” or 
“Bull” is regularly worshipped. However, we do not p ropose to delve 
further into the question as we must state, in all fairnes s to the learned 
counsel for the parties, that no one has tried to build a ny argument 
either in defence or in opposition to the judgment appe aled against by 
placing reliance on religion or Article 25 of the Con stitution.” 
 
Finally, our attention was invited to Sardar Syedna Tahe r Saifuddin Saheb 
v. State of Bombay 28 , wherein it was observed as under: 
“60. But very different considerations arise when one has to deal with 
legislation which is claimed to be merely a measure “ providing for social 
welfare and reform”. To start with, it has to be admi tted that this phrase 
is, as contrasted with the second portion of Article 25 (2)(b), far from 
precise and is flexible in its content. In this connecti on it has to be borne 
in mind that limitations imposed on religious practices on the ground of 
public order, morality or health have already been s aved by the opening 
words of Article 25(1) and the saving would cover bel iefs and practices 
even though considered essential or vital by those prof essing the religion. 
I consider that in the context in which the phrase occur s, it is intended 
to save the validity only of those laws which do not in vade the basic and 
essential practices of religion which are guaranteed b y the operative 
portion of Article 25(1) for two reasons : (1) To read the saving as covering 
even the basic essential practices of religion, would in effect nullify and 
render meaningless the entire guarantee of religious freedom — a 
freedom not merely to profess, but to practice religio n, for very few pieces 
of legislation for abrogating religious practices cou ld fail to be subsumed 
under the caption of “a provision for social welfare or reform” . (2) If the 
phrase just quoted was intended to have such a wide op eration as 
cutting at even the essentials guaranteed by Article 25(1 ), there would 
have been no need for the special provision as to “t hrowing open of 
Hindu religious institutions” to all classes and secti ons of Hindus since 
the legislation contemplated by this provision would be par excellence 
one of social reform.” 
 
73. It was pointed out, that in the counter-affidavit dated August 2016, 
filed on behalf of the Muslim Personal Law Board, i. e., respondent no.3 to 
this petition, the practices of triple talaq (as well as, ‘nikah halala’ and 
polygamy) have been referred to as “undesirable”.  I t was accordingly 
                                                 
28  AIR 1962 SC 853 120 submitted, that no “undesirable” practice can be conferr ed the status of an 
“essential practice”, much less one that forms the subs tratum of the 
concerned religion.   
74. It was asserted on behalf of the Union of India, that the Indian State 
was obligated to adhere to the principles enshrined in international 
covenants, to which it is a party.  India being a fou nding member of the 
United Nations, is bound by its Charter, which embodie s the first ever 
international agreement to proclaiming gender equality,  as a human right in 
its preamble, and reaffirming faith in fundamental hum an rights, through 
the dignity of the human person, by guaranteeing equal  rights to men and 
women. It was submitted, that significantly, the United Nati ons Commission 
on the Status of Women, first met in February, 1947, wi th 15 member 
States – all represented by women, including India (r epresented through 
Shareefah Hamid Ali). During its very first session, the Commission 
declared its guiding principles, including the pledge  to raise the status of 
women, irrespective of nationality, race, language or  religion, to the same 
level as men, in all fields of human enterprise, an d to eliminate all 
discrimination against women in the provisions of stat utory law, in legal 
maxims or rules, or in interpretation of customary law . (United Nations 
Commission on the Status of Women, First Session, E/28 1/Rev.1, February 
25, 1947).  It was submitted, that the Universal Declarati on of Human 
Rights, 1948, the International Covenant of Economic, So cial and Cultural 
Rights, 1966 and the International Covenant of Social and Political Rights, 
1966, emphasized on equality between men and women.   The other relevant 121 international instruments on women which were brought to our notice, 
included the Convention on the Political Rights of Women  (1952), 
Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children i n Emergency and 
Armed Conflict (1974), Inter-American Convention for the Prevention, 
Punishment and Elimination of Violence against Women ( 1955), Universal 
Declaration on Democracy (1997), and the Optional Pro tocol to the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrim ination against 
Women (1999).  It was submitted by the learned Attorney G eneral, that the 
Government of India ratified the Vienna Declaration and  the Convention on 
the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) on 
19-6-1993.  The preamble of CEDAW reiterates, that di scrimination against 
women violated the principles of equality of rights an d respect for human 
dignity.  And that, such inequality was an obstacle to the participation on 
equal terms with men in the political, social, econom ic and cultural life of 
their country.  It was emphasized that such inequality,  also hampered the 
growth of the personality from society and family, and made it more difficult 
for the full development of potentialities of women, in the service of their 
countries and of humanity.  Article 1 of the CEDAW, it was pointed out, 
defines discrimination against women, while Article 2( b) enjoins the State 
parties to pursue elimination of discrimination against  women, by adopting 
“appropriate legislative and other measures including sanctions where 
appropriate, prohibiting all discriminations against wo men”.  Clause (c) of 
Article 2 enjoins the ratifying States, to ensure legal protection of the rights 
of women, and Article 3 of the CEDAW enjoins the Stat es to take all 122 appropriate measures to ensure full development and ad vancement of 
women, for the purpose of guaranteeing to them, the exe rcise and 
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms on  the basis of 
equality with men.  It was further submitted on behalf of the Union of India, 
that the equality principles were reaffirmed in the Sec ond World Conference 
on Human Rights, held at Vienna in June 1993, as also , in the Fourth 
World Conference on Women, held at Beijing in 1995.   It was pointed out, 
that India was a party to this convention and other dec larations, and was 
committed to actualize them.  It was asserted, that in the 1993 Conference, 
gender-based violence and all categories of sexual harassment and 
exploitation, were condemned. 
75. Last of all, the Attorney General pointed out, the prevailing 
international trend all around the world, wherein the pr actice of divorce 
through ‘talaq-e-biddat’, has been statutorily done awa y with (-for details, 
refer to Part-5 – Abrogation of the practice of ‘talaq- e-biddat’ by legislation, 
the world over, in Islamic, as well as, non-Islamic States).  On the basis of 
the submissions noticed above, it was contended, that i t was extremely 
significant to note, that a large number of Muslim coun tries, or countries 
with a large Muslim populations such as, Pakistan, Ba ngladesh, 
Afghanistan, Morocco, Tunisia, Turkey, Indonesia, Eg ypt, Iran and Sri 
Lanka had undertaken significant reforms and had regu lated divorce law.  It 
was pointed out, that legislation in Pakistan requires a man to obtain the 
permission of an Arbitration Council.  Practices in Ba ngladesh, it was 
pointed out, were similar to those in Pakistan.  Tunisia  and Turkey, it was 123 submitted, also do not recognize extra-judicial divorce , of the nature of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’. In Afghanistan, divorce where three p ronouncements are 
made in one sitting, is considered to be invalid.  In Morocco and Indonesia, 
divorce proceedings take place in a secular court, pr ocedures of mediation 
and reconciliation are encouraged, and men and women  are considered 
equal in matters of family and divorce.  In Indonesia , divorce is a judicial 
process, where those marrying under Islamic Law, ca n approach the 
Religious Court for a divorce, while others can appro ach District Courts for 
the same.  In Iran and Sri Lanka, divorce can be gra nted by a Qazi and/or a 
court, only after reconciliation efforts have failed.  It was submitted, that 
even Islamic theocratic States, have undergone reform i n this area of the 
law, and therefore, in a secular republic like India , there is no reason to 
deny women, the rights available all across the Musl im world.  The fact that 
Muslim countries have undergone extensive reform, it was submitted, also 
establishes that the practice in question is not an esse ntial religious 
practice. 
76. In the circumstance aforesaid, it was submitted, that the practice of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’ cannot be protected under Article 25(1 ) of the Constitution.  
Furthermore, since Article 25(1) is subject to Part III of the Constitution, as 
such, it was liable to be in consonance with, and not v iolative of the rights 
conferred through Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Consti tution.  Since the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ clearly violates the funda mental rights expressed 
in the above Articles, it was submitted, that it be declar ed as 
unconstitutional. 124 77. It is also necessary for us to recount an interesti ng incident that 
occurred during the course of hearing.  The learned  Attorney General 
having assisted this Court in the manner recounted above , was emphatic 
that the other procedures available to Muslim men for o btaining divorce, 
such as, ‘talaq-e-ahsan’ and ‘talaq-e-hasan’ were als o liable to be declared 
as unconstitutional, for the same reasons as have been  expressed with 
reference to ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  In this behalf, the conte ntion advanced was, 
that just as ‘talaq-e-biddat’, ‘talaq-e-ahsan’ and ‘talaq- e-hasan’ were based 
on the unilateral will of the husband, neither of these forms of divorce 
required the availability of a reasonable cause with the husband to divorce 
his wife, and neither of these needed the knowledge a nd/or notice of the 
wife, and in neither of these procedures the knowledge  and/or consent of 
the wife was required.  And as such, the other two so- called approved 
procedures of divorce (‘talaq-e-ahsan’ and ‘talaq-e-h asan’) available to 
Muslim men, it was submitted, were equally arbitrary an d unreasonable, as 
the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  It was pointed out, that submissions during 
the course of hearing were confined by the Union of I ndia, to the validity of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’ merely because this Court, at the commen cement of 
hearing, had informed the parties, that the present heari ng would be limited 
to the examination of the prayer made by the petitioners  and the 
interveners on the validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  It wa s contended, that the 
challenge to ‘talaq-e-ahsan’ and ‘talaq-e-hasan’ would  follow immediately 
after this Court had rendered its pronouncement with ref erence to ‘talaq-e-
biddat’.  We have referred to the incident, and consid ered the necessity to 125 record it, because of the response of the learned Attor ney General to a query 
raised by the Bench.  One of us (U.U. Lalit, J.), enq uired from the learned 
Attorney General, that if all the three procedures refe rred to above, as were 
available to Muslim men to divorce their wives, were s et aside as 
unconstitutional, Muslim men would be rendered remed iless in matters of 
divorce?  The learned Attorney General answered the qu erry in the 
affirmative.   But assured the Court,  that the Parliament would enact a 
legislation within no time, laying down grounds on wh ich Muslim men could 
divorce their wives.  We have accordingly recorded th e above episode, 
because it has relevance to the outcome of the present ma tter. 
78. Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Additional Solicitor Ge neral of India, 
endorsed all the submissions and arguments, advanced by the learned 
Attorney General.  On each aspect of the matter, the lea rned Additional 
Solicitor General, independently supported the legal p ropositions canvassed 
on behalf of the Union of India. 
Part-8.  
 
The rebuttal of the petitioners’ contentions:  
 
79. The submissions advanced on behalf of the petition ers, were first of 
all sought to be repudiated by the AIMPLB – respondent no.8 (hereinafter 
referred to as the AIMPLB).  Mr. Kapil Sibal, Senior Advocate, and a number 
of other learned counsel represented the AIMPLB. In order to lay down the 
foundation to the submissions sought to be canvassed on behalf of the 
respondents, it was asserted, that ceremonies performed  at the time of birth 
of an individual, are in consonance with the religiou s norms of the family to 126 which the child is born. And thereafter, in continua tion each stage of life 
during the entire progression of life, is punctuated b y ceremonies. It was 
pointed out, that even the act of adoption of a child, in  some other family, 
has religious ceremonies. In the absence of such rel igious rituals, adoption 
is not valid. It was submitted, that religious observance s manifest an 
important fundamental position, in the life of every ind ividual.  Such 
religious observances, according to learned counsel,  include the manner in 
which members of a community were required to dress.   Insofar as the 
Muslim women are concerned, reference was made to ‘b urqa’ or ‘hijab’ worn 
by women, whereby women veil themselves, from the gaz e of strangers.  All 
these observances, are matters of faith, of those profe ssing the religion. It 
was asserted, that those who profess the Muslim religio n, follow the edicts 
expressed in the Quran.  It was submitted, that matrimon y, is like any 
other stage in an individual’s life.  It  has to be performed, in consonance 
with the ceremonies relating thereto.  So also, if a m arried couple decides to 
part ways, by way of divorce.  It was pointed out, that express religious 
ceremonies are observed even on an individual’s dea th.  It was submitted, 
that all issues including custody and guardianship of  children, 
maintenance, dower, gifts and such like issues, were matters guided by the 
faith of the people, associated to their religion.  How  property has to be 
distributed, upon divorce and/or at the time of death, is  also governed by 
faith. It was submitted, that questions of inheritance and succession, were 
likewise dealt with in consonance with the edicts of the  individual’s religion. 
All these issues, it was submitted, were matters of reli gious faith. 127 80. It was pointed out, that the personal affairs referre d to in the 
foregoing paragraph, fall in the realm of ‘personal law’.  This assertion, was 
sought to be demonstrated, by placing reliance on the d efinition of the term 
‘personal law’ in Blacks Law Dictionary (10th  edition, 2014), as follows: 
“The law that governs a person’s family matters, regard less of where the 
person goes .  In common law systems, personal law refers to the l aw of 
the person’s domicile.  In civil-law systems, it refer s to the law of the 
individual’s nationality (and so is sometimes called  lex patriae).” 
Reference was also made to the definition of the term ‘personal law’ in 
‘Conflict of Laws 188’ (7 th  edition, 1974) by R.H. Graveson, who defined the 
term as under: 
“The idea of the personal law is based on the concept ion of man as a 
social being, so that those transactions of his daily l ife which affect him 
most closely in a personal sense, such as marriage, divorce, legitimacy, 
many kinds of capacity, and succession, may be gove rned universally by 
that system of law deemed most suitable and adequate fo r the purpose  
…” 
Based on the cumulative definition of the term ‘persona l law’, it was 
submitted, that the evolution of the matters of faith relati ng to religious 
practices, must necessarily be judged in the context of practices adopted by 
the concerned community, with reference to each indiv idual aspect of 
‘personal law’.  It was conceded, on behalf of the A IMPLB, that ‘personal 
laws’ were per se  subservient to legislation, and as such, ‘personal la ws’ 
were liable to be considered as mandatory, with refer ence to numerous 
aspects of an individual’s life, only in the absence  of legislation. 
81. Even though it was acknowledged, that legislation on  an issue 
would override ‘personal law’ on the matter, it was p ointed out, that in the 
absence of legislation ‘personal laws’ in the India n context, could not be 128 assailed on the basis of their being in conflict with any of the provisions 
contained in Part III of the Constitution – the Fundamen tal Rights.  It was 
submitted, that in the absence of statutory law, religious  practices and 
faith, constituted the individual’s (belonging to a comm unity) right to 
profess the same.  In order to substantiate his contention , that a challenge 
to ‘personal law’ could not be raised on the anvil of  Articles 14, 15 and 21 of 
the Constitution, learned senior counsel, placed relia nce on the Narasu 
Appa Mali case 23 . Learned senior counsel, also placed reliance on S hri 
Krishna Singh v. Mathura Ahir 29 , wherein this Court arrived at the 
conclusion, that the rights of ‘sudras’ (the lowest am ongst the four Hindu 
castes – members of the workers caste), as were expres sed by the Smriti     
(-refers to a body of Hindu texts, traditionally recorde d in writing) writers, 
were invalid because they were in conflict with the fu ndamental rights 
guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution.  It was su bmitted, that both 
the above  judgments were considered by this Court in A hmedabad Women 
Action Group v. Union of India 30 , wherein, the legal position recorded in the 
above judgments was confirmed.  It was pointed out, tha t there was a clear 
distinction between ‘law’ and ‘law in force’, thus fa r interpreted by this 
Court with reference to Article 13 of the Constitution.  It was asserted, that 
read along with Article 372 – which mandates, that all laws in force in the 
territory of India, immediately before the commenceme nt of the 
Constitution, would continue to remain in force, until altered, repealed or 
amended by a competent legislature or other competent authority. It was 
                                                 
29  (1981) 3 SCC 689  
30  (1997) 3 SCC 573 129 submitted, that to affect a change in ‘personal law’, it was imperative to 
embark on legislation, as provided for through entry 5 of the Concurrent 
List in the Seventh Schedule, which provides – “marria ge and divorce; 
infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and su ccession; joint family 
and partition; all matters in respect of which parties in judicial p roceedings 
were immediately before the commencement of this Consti tution subject to 
their personal law. ”  It was therefore urged, that ‘personal laws’ per se  were 
not subject to challenge, under any of the provisions contained in Part III of 
the Constitution.   
82. It was contended, that the expression ‘custom and u sage’ in Article 
13 of the Constitution, would not include faith of reli gious denominations, 
embedded in their ‘personal law’.  Insofar as the ins tant aspect of the matter 
is concerned, reference was also made to Section 112 of the Government of 
India Act, 1915, wherein a clear distinction was soug ht to be drawn 
between ‘personal laws’ and ‘customs having force o f law’.  Section 112, 
aforementioned is extracted hereunder: 
“112. Law to be administered in cases of inheritance a nd succession. – 
The high courts at Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, in the  exercise of their 
original jurisdiction in suits against inhabitants of Calcutta, Madras or 
Bombay, as the case may be, shall, in maters of inher itance and 
succession to lands, rents and goods, and in matters o f contract and 
dealing between party and party, when both parties ar e subject to the 
same personal law or custom having the force of law,  decide according to 
that personal law or custom, and when the parties are su bject to 
different personal laws or customs having  the force  of law, decide 
according to the law or custom to which the defendant is  subject .” 
It was pointed out, that in framing Article 13, the choice  of the words 
“custom and usage” and the exclusion of the expressio n “personal law” 
needed to be taken due note of.  It was submitted, that th e Constituent 130 Assembly was aware of the use of the term ‘personal l aw’ (-which it 
consciously used in entry 5 of the Concurrent List, i n the Seventh Schedule) 
and the term ‘customs and usages’, which the Constituen t Assembly, 
employed while framing Article 13 of the Constitution.   It was pointed out, 
that the above position was consciously highlighted by a Full Bench of the 
Andhra Pradesh High Court in the Youth Welfare Federat ion case 31 .  It was 
submitted, that if the term ‘personal law’ was excluded from the definition 
‘law in force’ deployed in Article 13, then matters of  faith having a direct 
relationship to some religious denomination (matters of ‘personal law’), do 
not have to satisfy the rights enumerated in Articles 14,  15 and 21 of the 
Constitution.  In the above view of the matter, it was contended, that the 
challenge raised on behalf of the petitioners on the b asis of the provisions 
contained in Part III – Fundamental Rights, needed to  be summarily 
rejected 
83. Having presented the aforesaid overview of the co nstitutional 
position Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel, en deavoured to deal with 
the concept of ‘talaq’ in ‘Shariat’ – Muslim ‘personal law’.  Learned senior 
counsel pointed out, that religious denominations in In dia with reference to 
Islam were divided into two categories – the Sunnis, and the Shias.  It was 
pointed out, that Sunnis were again sub-divided into re ligious 
denominations/schools.  The four prominent Sunni scho ols being – Hanafi, 
Malaki, Shafei and Hanbali. It was submitted, that a fif th 
school/denomination had emerged later – Ahl-e-Hadith .  It was pointed out, 
                                                 
31  (1996) ALT 1138(-Writ Petition No.9717 of 1983, de cided on 9.10.1996) 131 that in India 90% of the Muslims amongst the Sunnis, b elonged to the 
Hanafi school.  It was submitted, that Shia and the other denominations of 
the Sunnis comprised a very small population of Musl ims in India. 
84. Learned counsel emphasized, that the three forms of  talaq – ‘talaq-
e-ahsan’, ‘talaq-e-hasan’ and ‘talaq-e-biddat’ referre d to by the petitioners, 
during the course of hearing, were merely depicting t he procedure which a 
Muslim husband was required to follow, to divorce his  wife.  It was pointed 
out, that none of these procedural forms, finds a refer ence in the Quran.  It 
was asserted, that none of these forms is depicted eve n in the ‘hadith’.  It 
was acknowledged, that ‘hadiths’ declared talaq by itse lf, as not a good 
practice, and yet – recognized the factum of talaq, and its legal sanctity.  It 
was submitted, that talaq was accepted by all believers o f Islam.  It was 
therefore contended, that it was absurd for the petitioner s to have 
submitted that the Quran alone, provided the details with r eference to 
which, and in the manner in which, talaq could be ad ministered.  It was 
therefore asserted, that a close examination of the cha llenge raised by the 
petitioners would reveal that talaq as a concept itself w as not under 
challenge at the hands of the petitioners.  It was pointed  out, that truthfully 
the petitioners were merely assailing the course adopte d by Muslim men, in 
divorcing their wives through the ‘talaq-e-biddat’ proc edure. 
85. Learned counsel acknowledged the position adopted on behalf of the 
petitioners, namely, that Islam represents (i) what is pr ovided for in the 
Quran, (ii) what was stated and practiced by the Prophet Muhammad from 
time to time, and (iii) what was memorized and recorded  in the ‘hadiths’ 132 which through centuries of generations, Muslim belief  represents what the 
Prophet Muhamad had said and practiced.  It was assert ed, that the afore-
stated parameters represent Islamic law being practiced  by Mulsims over 
centuries, which had become part of the religious faith  of various Muslim 
denominations/schools.  This ambit of recognized pra ctices, according to 
learned counsel, falls within the sphere of  Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’. 
86. Learned senior counsel then attempted to highlight various verses 
from the Quran, to substantiate his contention.  The same  are set out 
hereunder:  
“i. Whatever ‘Allah has passed on to His Messenger f rom the people of 
the towns is for Allah and for the Messenger, and for the kinsmen and 
the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, so that it may not circulate 
only between the rich among you.  And whatever the Mes senger gives 
you, take it, and whatever he forbids you from, abstain  (from it).  And 
fear Allah. Indeed Allah is severe in punishment. (Q uran, Al-Hashr 
59:71) 
ii. O you who believe, obey Allah and His Messenger , and do not turn 
away from Him whn you listen (to him).  (Quran, Al-An fal 8:20) 
iii. We did not send any Messenger but to be obeyed b y the leave of Allah.  
Had they, after having wronged themselves, come to yo u and sought 
forgiveness from Allah, and had the Messenger prayed  for their 
forgiveness, they would certainly have found Allah Mo st-Relenting, Very-
Merciful (Quran, Al-Nisa 4:64) 
iv. That is because they were hostile to Allah and His Messenger; and 
whoever becomes hostile to Allah and His Messenger, th en, Allah is 
severe at punishment. (Quran, Al-Anfal 8:13) 
v. It is not open for a believing man or a believing woman, once Allah and 
His messenger have decided a thing, that they should h ave a choice 
about their mattr; and whoever disobeys Allah and His m essenger, he 
indeed gets off the track, falling into an open error.  (Quran, Al-Ahzab 
33:36) 
vi. Whoever breaks away with the Messenger after th e right path has 
become clear to him, and follows what is not the way of  the believers, we 
shall let him have what he chose, and We shall admit h im to Jahannam, 
which is an evil place to return. (Quran, Al-Nisa 4:1 15)” 
 
In addition to the above, reference was also made to th e Quran with respect 
to triple talaq. The same are set out hereunder: 133 “i. Divorce is twice; then either to retain in all fair ness, or to release 
nicely.  It is not lawful for you to take back anythi ng from what you have 
given them, unless both apprehend that they would not be  able to 
maintain the limits set by Allah.  Now, if you apprehen d that they would 
not maintain the limits set by Allah, then, there is no s in or them in what 
she gives up to secure her release.  These are the li mits set by Allah.  
Therefore, do not exceed them.  Whosoever exceeds the  limits set by 
Allah, then, those are the transgressors. (Quran, Al-Ba qarah 2:229) 
ii. Thereafter, if he divorces her, she shall no lo nger remain lawful for 
him unless she marries a man other than him.  Should he too divorce 
her, then there is no sin on them in their returning to each other, if they 
think they would maintain the limits set by Allah.  Thes e are the limits 
set by Allah that He makes clear to a people who know  (that Allah is 
alone capable of setting these limits.  (Quran, Al-Baqa rah 2:229 and 230) 
iii. When you have divorced women, and they have rea ched (the end of) 
their waiting period, do not prevent them from marrying their husbands 
when they mutually agree with fairness.  Thus, the advi ce is given to 
everyone of you who believes in Allah and in the He reafter.  This is more 
pure and clean for you.  Allah knows and you do not know. (Quran, Al-
Baqarah, 2:232) 
iv. O Prophet, when you people divorce women, divorc e them at a time 
when the period of Iddah may start.  And count the perio d of Iddah, and 
fear Allah, your Lord.  Do not expel them from their h ouses, nor should 
they go out, unless they come up with a clearly shamele ss act.  These are 
the limits prescribed by Allah.  And whoever exceeds the limits 
prescribed by Allah wrongs his own self.  You do no t know (what will 
happen in future); it may be that Allah brings about a n ew situation 
thereafter. (Quran, Al-Talaq, 65:1)” 
 
In order to demonstrate the complete picture, learned senior counsel invited 
the Court’s attention to the statements attributed to the Prop het Mo ham ad 
with reference to talaq which, according to learned c ounsel, would have a 
bearing on the determination of the controversy in hand .  The same are 
extracted as under: 
“i. Salmah bid Abi Salmah narrated to his father that w hen Hafs bin 
Mughaira resorted to Triple Talaq, the Prophet (Pbuh) held it as valid. All 
the three pronouncements were made with  a single word so the Prophet 
(Pubh) separated her from him irrevocably.  And it d idn’t reach to us that 
the Prophet (Pubh) rebuked him for that (Daraqutni, Kita b Al-Talaq wa 
Al-Khula wa Al-Aiyla,5/23, Hadith number:3992) 
ii. Amas recpimts pm Muadh’s authority: “I heard the Prophet (Pbuh) 
sying : O Muadh, whoever resorts to bidaa divorce, be  it one, two or 134 three.  We will make his divorce effective. (Daraqutni , 5/81. Kitab al-
Talaq wa Al-Khulawa aI-Aiyala, Hadith number: 4020)  
iii. (When Abdullah Ibn Umar divorced his wife once  while she was 
having menses.  The Prophet (Pbuh) asked him to retain  his wife saying, 
O Ibn e Umar, Allah Tabarak wa taala didn’t command l ike this: “You 
acted against Sunnah.  And sunnah is that you wait for Tuhar then 
divorce at every purity period.  He said so Prophet ( Pbuh) Ordered me so 
I retained her.  Then he said to me: When she becomes  pure divorce at 
that time or keep (her) So Abdullah ibn Umar asked: “H ad I resorted to 
Triple Talaq then, could I retain her?”  The Prophet ( Pbuh) replied: “No, 
she would be separated from you and such an ction o your part would 
have been a sin” (Sunan Bayhaqi, 7/547, Hadith numb er: 14955). 
iv. Aishah Khathmiya was Hasan bin Ali’s wife.  Whe n Ali was killed and 
Hasan bin Ali was made caliph.  Hasan bin Ali visit ed her and she 
congratulated him for the caliphate.  Hasan bin Ali rep lied, “you have 
expressed happiness over the killing of Ali.  So you  are divorced thrice”.  
She covered herself with her cloth and said, “By All ah I did not mean 
this”.  She stayed until her iddat lapsed and she depa rted.  Hasan bin Ali 
sent her the remaining dower and a gift of twenty thous and dirhams.  
When the messenger reached her and she saw the money she said “this 
is a very small gift from the beloved from whom I ha ve been separated”.  
When the messenger informed Hasan bin Ali about this h e broke into 
tears saying, “Had I not heard from my father reporti ng from my 
grandfather that the Prophet (Pbuh) said that whoever pro nounced triple 
talaaq upon his wife, she will not be permitted to him till the time she 
marries a husband other than he, I would have taken h er back.  (AI-
Sunan AI-Kubra Iil Bayhaqi, Hadith number: 14492) 
v. Uwaymar Ajlani complained to the Prophet (Pbuh) tha t he had seen 
his wife committing adultery.  His wife denied this cha rge.  In line with 
the Quranic command, the Prophet (Pbuh) initiated “a pr oceeding for the 
couple.  Upon the completion of the process, Uwaymar s aid: “If I retain 
her, I Will be taken as a liar”.  So in the Prophet’s presence, and without 
the Prophet’s command, he pronounced Triple Talaq. (S ahi al-Bukhari 
Kitab al-Talaq, Hadith number: 5259)” 
 
87. Having dealt with the verses from the Quran and th e statements 
attributed to the Prophet Muhammad, learned senior counse l invited the 
Court’s attention to ‘hadiths’, in relation to talaq.  The  same are extracted 
below: 
“(i) Of all the things permitted by Allah, divorce is the most undesirable 
act. (Sunan Abu Dawud, Bad Karahiya al-Talaq, Hadith  no: 2178). 
(ii) If a person who had pronounced Triple Talaq in  one go was brought to 
Caliph Umar he would put him to pain by beating and th ereafter 
separate the couple. (Musannaf ibn Abi Shaybah, Bab man kara an 135 yatliq aI rajal imratahuu thalatha fi maqad wahadi wa ajaza dhalika 
alayhi.  Hadith number: 18089. 
(iii) Alqama narrated from Abdullah that he was asked about a person 
who pronounced hundred divorces to his wife.  He sai d three made her 
prohibited (to him) and ninety seven is transgression (Musannaf ibn Abi 
Shayba, Kitab al-Talaq, bab fi al rajal yatlaqu imra tahuu miata aw alfa.  
Hadith number: 18098) 
(iv) A man met another playful man in Medinah.  He s aidk, “Did you 
divorce your wife?  He said, “Yes”.  He said, “How many thousand? (How 
many? He replied: thousand).  So he was presented be fore Umar.  He 
said so you have divorced your wife?  He said I was  playing.  So he 
mounted upon him with the whip and said out of these thr ee will suffice 
you.  Another narrator reports Umar saying: “Triple T alaq will suffice 
you” (Musannaf Abd al-Razzaq, Kitab al-talaq, Hadith number 11340).  
(v) Abdullah Ibn Umar said: “Whoever resorts to Tripl e Talaq, he disobeys 
his Lord and wife is alienated from him.” (Musannaf  ibn Abi Shayba, 
Kitab aI-Talaq, Hadith no: 18091). 
(vi) Imran Ibn Hussain was asked about a person who divorced his wife 
by Triple Talaq in single session.  He said that the person had disobeyed 
his Lord and his wife had become prohibited to him.  (Musannaf Ibn Abi 
Shayba, Hadith no: 18087) 
(vii) If one tells his wife with whom he did not have  conjugal relations: 
Triple Talaq be upon you it will be effective.  For h e divorced her while 
she was his wife.  Same holds true for his wife with whom his marriage 
was consummated.” (Al-Muhadhdhab, 4/305) 
(viii) Chapter heading runs thus:  “The sance of those  who take the 
Quranic statement: ‘Divorce can be pronounced twice, th en either 
honourable retention or kind release; to mean that Trip le Talaq becomes 
effective. (Bukhari, 3/402)” 
 
88. Based on the factual position recorded in the prev ious three 
paragraphs, it was submitted, that this Court should not  attempt to 
interpret the manner in which the believers of the fai th had understood the 
process for pronouncement of talaq.  It was pointed out , that matters of 
faith should best be left to be interpreted by the commu nity itself, in the 
manner in which its members understand their own relig ion.  This, 
according to learned counsel, was imperative in view  of the absolute 
contradictions which clearly emerge from a collective  perusal of the 
submissions advanced on behalf the petitioners, as als o, those canvassed 136 on behalf of the respondents.  It was submitted, that diff erent scholars have 
applied different interpretations.  It was also pointed  out, that the 
interpretations relied upon on behalf of the petitioners , were mostly of 
scholars who did not belong to the Sunni faith, and were therefore 
irrelevant, for the determination of the interpretation o f the believers and 
followers of the Hanafi school of Sunni Muslims.  On e of the scholars relied 
upon, according to learned senior counsel, was a di sciple of Mirza Ghulam 
Ahmed (the founder of the Quadini school), who declar ed himself to be the 
Prophet, after the demise of the Prophet Muhammad.  It w as pointed out, 
that Quadini’s disciple was Mohammed Ali.  And, the i nterpretations relied 
upon by different High Courts (-for reference, see   Part-6 – Judicial 
pronouncements, on the subject of ‘talaq-e-biddat’), in recording their 
conclusions, were based on views attributed to Mohammed  Ali.  It was 
submitted, that Mohammed Ali is not recognized by all Mu slims, and as 
such, it would be a travesty of justice if his utteranc es were to be relied 
upon and followed, contrary to the faith of Muslims ( –especially Muslims 
belonging to Hanafi school).  Having expressed the a foresaid overview, 
learned senior counsel highlighted from individual j udgments of the High 
Courts (-for details, refer to Part-6 – Judicial  pron ouncements, on the 
subject of ‘talaq-e-biddat’) and pointed out, that th e reliances on various 
‘hadiths’ recorded therein were not appropriate in the background projected 
above. 
89. Having made the above submissions, learned senio r counsel 
attempted to pointedly approach the subject of ‘talaq-e-b iddat’ – triple talaq. 137 In this behalf it was reiterated, that talaq was in thre e forms – ‘talaq-e-
ahsan’, ‘talaq-e-hasan’ and ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  It was p ointed out, that none of 
these forms of talaq are referred to either in the Quran , or the ‘hadith’.  It 
was submitted, that the aforesaid three forms of talaq, have been so 
categorized by Islamic scholars.  It was pointed out, th at what was common 
in all the forms of talaq, was the finality thereof, in the matter of severance 
of the matrimonial tie between the husband and wife.  A nother 
commonness was also pointed out, namely, that ‘talaq-e- ahsan’, if not 
revoked, attain finality; that ‘talaq-e-hasan’ if likew ise not revoked, is 
treated as final; and that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple tal aq at the time of its 
pronouncement, is considered as final.  It was submitte d, that all 
kinds/forms of talaq when administered three times bec ame irrevocable.  
Yet again, it was reiterated, that the petitioners before  this Court were not 
challenging the finality of talaq, they were merely ch allenging the procedure 
adopted by the Muslim husbands while administering ‘ta laq-e-biddat’, 
which has the immediate consequences of finality. 
90. In the context expressed in the preceding paragrap h, it was sought 
to be highlighted, that Imam Abu Hanifa did not himself record his own 
understanding what the Prophet Muhammad  had said. It was pointed out, 
that he had two disciples – Abu Yusuf and Imam Mohamm ed. It was 
submitted, that Imam Abu Yusuf in his book “Ikhtilaaf A bi Hanifah wabni 
Abi Laila” (first edition, 1357) stated the following on  the triple talaq: 
“i. If the man said to his wife, “Your matter is in yo ur hand:, she said, “I 
have divorced myself three times”.  Abu Haneefah (may  Allah be pleased 
with him) says: “If the husband intends three times, the n it is three.” 138 Reference was also made to the writings of Imam Abu Mo hammed in his 
book entitled “Al-Mautta” (first volume), wherein he ass erted as under: 
“i. Muhammad says: So we follow this that if she cho oses her husband 
then it will not be counted a divorce, and if she choos es herself then it is 
accorfding to what her husband intended, if his inten tion is one hen it 
will be counted one irrevocable (Baainah) divorce, a nd if his is three it 
will be three divorces.  This is the saying of Abu Ha nifah.” 
 
91. Reference was also made to writings with respect to  ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
by scholars of other schools.  In this behalf, the Co urt’s attention was 
invited to the following: 
“(i) Most of the Ulema take the innovative divorce as effective (Baday al-
sanay, fasl Hukum Talaq-al Bidaa, Kitab al-Talaq, 3 /153).   
(ii) What do you think about the effectiveness of pron ouncing divorce 
thrice upon one’s pregnant wife either in one go or in  three different 
sessions, Imam Malik replied in the affirmative. (AI- Mudawwana, 2/68) 
(iii) The validity of triple talaq is also endorsed b y all Ahl Al Sunnah 
jurists.  Allama Ibn Quda ma adds that: “This view is  attributed to 
Abdul/ah ibn Abbas.  The same stance is shared by mo st of the 
successors and later scholars.” (AI-Mughni Ii Ibn Q udama, 10/334) 
(iv) The Book, Sunnah, and the consensus view of cl assical authorities is 
that Triple Talaq is effective, even if pronounced in one go.  The act in 
itself is, however, a sin.” (Ahkam al-Quran Iil Jass as, 2/85) 
(v) Imam Shafe’I (of Shafe’I School) has stated as fo llows in his book 
entitled as Al-Umm (fifth volume): 
If he says you are divorced absolutely, with the inten tion of triple divorce 
then it will be considered triple divorce and if he in tends one it will be 
considered one divorce and if he says you are divor ced with the intention 
of three it will be considered three. (page 359) 
(vi) Mauffaqud Din Abi Muhammed Abdillah Ben Ahmed Ben 
Muhammed Ben Qudamah Al-Muqaddasi Al-Jammaili Al-Di mashqi Al-
Salihi Al-Hanbali (of the Hanbali School) in his bo ok entitled as Al-
Mughni (tenth volume) has stated as follows: 
Ahmed said: If he says to wife: Divorce yourself, i ntending three, and she 
has divorced herself thrice, it will be considered thr ee, and if he has 
intended one then it will considered one. (page 394) 
(vii) Allama Ibn Qudama, a Hanbali jurist is of the v iew that if one 
divorces thrice with a single utterance, this divorce w ill be effective and 
she will be unlawful for him until she marries domeo ne else.  
Consummation of marriage is immaterial.  The validi ty of Triple Talaq is 
also endorsed by all Ahl Al Sunnah juristics.  Allam a Ibn Qudamma adds 
that: “This view is attributed to Abdullah ibn Abbas, Abu  Huraira, Umar, 
Abdullah ibn Umar, Abdullah ibn Amr ibn Aas, Abdull ah ibn Masud, and 139 Anas.  The same stance is shared by most of the succes sors and later 
scholars.”” (Al-Mughni li Ibn Qudama, 10,334)”. 
 
92. Based on the ‘hadiths’ depicted in the foregoing, and in the 
paragraphs preceding thereto, it was submitted, that for the Hanafi school 
of Sunni Muslims ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq was a part and parcel of 
their ‘personal law’, namely, a part and parcel of the ir faith, which they had 
followed generation after generation, over centuries.  That being the 
position, it was submitted, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ should b e treated as the 
constitutionally protected fundamental right of Muslim s, which could not be 
interfered with on the touchstone of being violative of  the fundamental 
rights, enshrined in the Constitution – or for that ma tter, constitutional 
morality propounded at the behest of the petitioners.   
93. Learned senior counsel reiterated, that judicial  intereference in the 
matter of ‘personal law’ is not the proper course to b e adopted for achieving 
the prayers raised by the petitoners.  Reference was ma de by a large 
number of Muslim countries across the world (-for de tails, refer to Part-5 – 
Abrogation of the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ by legis lation, the world over, in 
Islamic, as well as, non-Islamic States), which had provided the necessary 
succor by legislating on orthodox practices, which wer e not attuned to 
present day social norms.  It was submitted, that in al l the countries in 
which the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ has been annulle d or was being read 
down, as a matter of interpretation, the legislatures of  the respective 
countries have interfered to bring in the said reform . 
94. In order to fully express the ambit and scope of ‘ personal law’, and 
to demonstrate the contours of the freedom of conscien ce and free 140 profession, practice and propagation of religion pro pounded in Article 25, 
learned senior counsel placed reliance on the Consti tuent Assembly 
debates.  Interestingly reference was, first of all, m ade to Article 44 of the 
Contitution, which is extracted below: 
“44. Uniform civil code for the citizens.- The State s hall endeavour to 
secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughou t the territory of 
India.” 
It is necessary to notice, that during the Constituent Asse mbly debates, the 
present Article 44 was numbered as draft Article 35.  D uring the course of 
the Constituent Assembly debates, amendments to draft Artic le 35 were 
proposed by Mohamed Ismail Sahib, Naziruddin Ahmad,  Mahboob Ali Beg, 
Sahib Bahadur and Pocker Sahib Bahadur.  Relevant  extract of their 
amendments and their explanations thereto are reproduce d below: 
“Mr. Mohamad Ismail Sahib (Madras: Muslim): Sir, I move that the 
following proviso be added to article 35: 
"Provided that any group, section or community of peopl e shall not be 
obliged to give up its own personal lawin case it has such a law ." 
The right of a group or a community of people to foll owand adhere to its 
own personal law is among the fundamentalrights and th is provision 
should really be made amongst thestatutory and justicia ble fundamental 
rights. It is for thisreason that I along with other fr iends have given 
amendmentsto certain other articles going previous to th is which I will 
move at the proper time . 
Now the right to follow personal law is part of the way of life of those 
people who are following such laws; it ispart of their  religion and part of 
their culture. Ifanything is done affecting the personal  laws, it will 
betantamount to interference with the way of life of those people who 
have been observing these laws for generationsand ag es. This secular 
State which we are trying to createshould not do anyth ing to interfere 
with theway of life and religion of the people . The matter ofretaining 
personal law is nothing new; we have precedents inEur opean countries. 
Yugoslavia, for instance, that is, thekingdom of the Se rbs, Croats and 
Slovenes, is obliged undertreaty obligations to guaran tee the rights of 
minorities.The clause regarding rights of Mussulmans reads as follows: 141 "The Serb, Croat and Slovene State agrees to grant tothe  Mussulmans in 
the matter of family law and personalstatus provisions  suitable for 
regulating these matters inaccordance with the Mussulman  usage." 
We find similar clauses in several other Europeancon stitutions also. But 
these refer to minorities while myamendment refers not to  the minorities 
alone but to allpeople including the majority communi ty, because it 
says,"Any group, section or community of people shal l not beobliged" etc. 
Therefore it seeks to secure the rights of allpeople in  regard to their 
existing personal law. 
Again this amendment does not seek to introduce anyinnov ation or bring 
in a new set of laws for the people, butonly wants the  maintenance of the 
personal law already existing among certain sections o f people. Now why 
do peoplewant a uniform civil code, as in article 35?  Their ideaevidently 
is to secure harmony through uniformity. But Imainta in that for that 
purpose it is not necessary toregiment the civil law of  the people 
including the personallaw. Such regimentation will br ing discontent and 
harmonywill be affected. But if people are allowed to  follow theirown 
personal law there will be no discontent ordissatisfa ction. Every section 
of the people, being free tofollow its own personal la w will not really come 
in conflictwith others . 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad: Sir, I beg to move: 
"That to article 35, the following proviso be added, na mely: - 
Provided that the personal law of any community which  has been 
guaranteed by the statue shall not be changedexcept with t he previous 
approval of the community ascertained in such manner  as the Union 
Legislature maydetermine by law ." 
In moving this, I do not wish to confine my remarks to the inconvenience 
felt by the Muslim community alone. I would put it on a much broader 
ground. In fact, eachcommunity, each religious commu nity has certain 
religious laws, certain civil laws inseparably conne cted withreligious 
beliefs and practices. I believe that in framing a un iform draft code these 
religious laws or semi-religious laws should be kep t out of its way. There 
are several reasons which underlie this amendment. On e of them is that 
perhaps it clashes with article 19 of the Draft Constitu tion. In article 19 
it is provided that `subject to public order, morality a nd health and to 
the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equa lly entitled to 
freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess , practise and 
propagate religion.  In fact, this is so fundamental that the Drafting 
Committee has very rightly introduced this in this place.  Then in 
clause(2) of the same article it has been further prov ided by way of  
limitation of the right that `Nothing in this article s hall affect the 
operation of any existing law or preclude the State from  making any law 
regulating or restricting any economic, financial, pol itical or other 
secular activity which may be associated with religiou s practice'. I can 
quite see that there may be many pernicious practices wh ich may  
accompany religious practices and they may be controll ed. But there are 
certain religious practices, certain religious laws wh ich do not come 
within the exception in clause (2), viz. financial, political or other secular 142 activity which may be associated with religious practi ces. Having 
guaranteed, and very rightly guaranteed the freedom of  religious practice 
and the freedom to propagate religion, I think the pres ent article tries to 
undo what has been given in article 19 . I submit, Sir, that we must try to 
prevent this anomaly. In article 19 we enacted a positi ve provision which 
is justiciable and which any subject of a State irrespe ctive of his caste 
and community can take to a Court of law and seek enfo rcement. On the 
other hand, by the article under reference we are givi ng the State some 
amount of latitude which may enable into ignore the rig ht conceded. And 
this right is not justiciable . It recommends to the State certain things 
and therefore it gives a right to the State. But then the su bject has not 
been given any right under this provision. Submit that  the present article 
is likely to encourage testate to break the guarantees given in article 19 . 
I submit, Sir, there are certain aspects of the Civil Procedure Code which 
have already interfered with our personal laws and ve ry rightly so. But 
during the 175 years of British rule, they did not in terfere with certain 
fundamental personal laws. They have enacted the Regi stration Act, the 
Limitation Act, the Civil Procedure Code, the Criminal P rocedure Code, 
the Penal Code, the Evidence Act, the Transfer of Prope rty Act, the Sarda 
Act and various other Acts. They have been imposed gra dually as 
occasion arose and they were intended to make the law s uniform  
although they clash with the personal laws of particul ar community. But 
take the case of marriage practice and the laws of inhe ritance. They have 
never interfered with them. It will be difficult at thi s stage of our society 
to ask the people to give up their ideas of marriage, which are associated  
with religious institutions in many communities. The l aws of inheritance 
are also supposed to be the result of religious injunc tions. I submit that 
the interference with these matters should be gradual a nd must progress 
with the advance of time. I have no doubt that a stage wo uld come when  
the civil law would be uniform. But then that time has n ot yet come. We 
believe that the power that has been given to the State to m ake the Civil 
Code uniform is in advance of the time. As it is, any State would be 
justified under article 35 to interfere with the settled laws of the different  
communities at once. For instance, there remarriage pr actices in various 
communities. If we want to introduce a law that every mar riage shall be 
registered and if not it will not be valid, we can do s o under article 35.  
But would you invalidate a marriage which is valid un der the existing 
law and under the present religious beliefs and practi ces on the ground 
that it has not been registered under any new law and thu s bastardize  
the children born ? 
This is only one instance of how interference can go  too far. As I have 
already submitted, the goal should be towards a unifor m civil code but it 
should be gradual and with the consent of the people c oncerned. I have 
therefore in my amendment suggested that religious laws  relating to  
particular communities should not be affected except w ith their consent 
to be ascertained in such manner as Parliament may dec ide by law. 
Parliament may well decide to ascertain the consent of the community 
through their representatives, and this could be secured  by the 143 representatives by their election speeches and pledges . In fact, this may 
be made an article of faith in an election, and a vote on that could be 
regarded as consent. These are matters of detail. I h ave attempted by my 
amendment to leave it to the Central Legislature to decide how to 
ascertain this consent. Submit, Sir, that this is not a ma tter of mere 
idealism. It is a question of stern reality which we m ust not refuse to face 
and I believe it will lead to a considerable amount of  misunderstanding 
and resentment amongst the various sections of the countr y. What the 
British in 175 years failed to door was afraid to do,  what the Muslims in 
the course of 500 years refrained from doing, we sho uld not give power to 
testate to do all at once . I submit, Sir, that we should proceed not in 
haste but with caution, with experience, with statesmanship  and with 
sympathy. 
Mahbood Ali Baig Sahib Bahadur: Sir, I move that the f ollowing proviso 
be added to article 35: 
"Provided that nothing in this article shall affect the p ersonal law of the 
citizen ." 
My view of article 35 is that the words "Civil Code" do not cover the 
strictly personal law of a citizen. The Civil Code co vers laws of this kind: 
laws of property, transfer of property, law of contra ct, law of evidence etc. 
The law as observed by a particular religious commun ity is not covered 
by article 35. That is my view. Anyhow, in order to cl arify the position 
that article 35 does not affect the personal law of the citizen, I have given 
notice of this amendment. Now, Sir, if for any reason  the framers of this 
article have got in their minds that the personal law o f the citizen is also  
covered by the expression "Civil Code", I wish to sub mit that they are 
overlooking the very important fact of the personal law being so much 
dear and near to certain religious communities. As f ar as the 
Mussalmans are concerned, their laws of succession, inheritance, 
marriage and divorce are completely dependent upon t heir religion . 
Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar: It is a matter of con tract. 
Mahboob Ali Baig Sahib Bahadur: I know that Mr.Ananth asayanam 
Ayyangar has always very queer ideas about the laws o f other 
communities. It is interpreted as contract, while the ma rriage amongst 
the Hindus is a Samskara and that among Europeans it is  a matter of 
status. I know that very well, but this contract is enjoin ed on the 
Mussalmans by the Quran and if it is not followed, mar riage is not a 
legal marriage at all. For 1350 years this law has b een practised by 
Muslims and recognised by all authorities in all stat es. If today Mr. 
Ananthasayanam Ayyangar is going to say that some other method of 
proving the marriage is going to be introduced, we ref use to abide by it 
because it is not according to our religion. It is not a ccording to the code 
that is laid down for us for all times in this matter. Therefore, Sir, it is 
not a matter to be treated so lightly. I know that in the ca se of some 
other communities also, their personal law depends en tirely upon their  
religious tenets. If some communities have got their o wn way of dealing 
with their religious tenets and practices, that cannot b e imposed on a 
community which insists that their religious tenets shou ld be observed . 144 B. Pocker Sahib Bahadur (Madras: Muslim): Mr. Vice- President, Sir, I 
support the motion which has already been moved by Mr.  Mohamed 
Ismail Sahib to the effect that the following proviso be  added to article 
35: - 
"Provide that any group, section or community of people  shall not be 
obliged to give up its own personal law in casein has  such a law ." 
It is a very moderate and reasonable amendment to this article 35. Now I 
would request the House to consider this amendment not f rom the point 
of view of the Mussalman community alone, but from the  point of view of 
the various communities that exist in this country, follo wing various 
codes of law, with reference to inheritance, marriage,  succession, 
divorce, endowments and so many other matters. The Hou se will not that 
one of the reasons why the Britisher, having conquered  this country, has 
been able to carry on the administration of this country  for the last 150 
years and over was that he gave a guarantee of follow ing their own 
personal laws to each of the various communities in th e country. That is 
one of the secrets of success and the basis of the adm inistration of 
justice on which even the foreign rule was based. I a sk, Sir, whether by 
the freedom we have obtained for this country, are we g oing to give up 
that freedom of conscience and that freedom of religio us practices and 
that freedom of following one's own personal law and try or aspire to 
impose upon the whole country one code of civil law, whatever it may 
mean, - which I say, as it is, may include even all branches of civil law, 
namely, the law of marriage, law of inheritance, law of divorce and so 
many other kindred matters ? 
In the first place, I would like to know the real intenti on with which this 
clause has been introduced. If the words "Civil Code" are intended only 
to apply to matters procedure like the Civil Procedure Code and such 
other laws which are uniform so far as India is conc erned at present 
well, nobody has any objection to that, but the various civil Courts Acts 
in the various provinces in this country have secured  for each 
community the right to follow their personal laws as r egards marriage, 
inheritance, divorce, etc. But if it is intended that the a spiration of the 
State should be to override all these provisions and to have uniformity of 
law to be imposed upon the whole people on these matters  which are 
dealt with by the Civil Courts Acts in the various provin ces, well, I would 
only say, Sir, that it is a tyrannous provision whic h ought not to be 
tolerated; and let it not be taken that I am only voicing forth the feelings  
of the Mussalmans. In saying this, I am voicing fort h the feelings of ever 
so many sections in this country who feel that it would  be really  
tyrannous to interfere with the religious practices, an d with the religious 
laws, by which they are governed now . 
xxx   xxx   xxx 
If such a body as this interferes with the religious r ights and practices, it 
will be tyrannous. These organisations have used a much stronger 
language than I amusing, Sir. Therefore, I would req uest the Assembly 
not to consider what I have said entirely as coming fr om the point of view 
of the Muslim community. I know there are great diffe rences in the law of 145 inheritance and various other matters between the vari ous sections of 
the Hindu community. Is this Assembly going to set asid e all these 
differences and make them uniform? By uniform, I ask , what do you 
mean and which particular law, of which community ar e you going to 
take as the standard? What have you got in your mind in enacting a 
clause like this? There are the mitakshara and Dayabag a systems; there 
are so many other systems followed by various other c ommunities. What 
is it that you are making the basis? 
Is it open to us to do anything of this sort? By this on e clause you are 
revolutionising the whole country and the whole setup. There is no need 
for it. 
Sir, as already pointed out by one of my predecessors  in speaking on this 
motion, this is entirely antagonistic tithe provision made  as regards 
Fundamental Rights in article19. If it is antagonistic, w hat is the 
purpose served by clause like this? Is it open to this Assembly to pass by 
one stroke of the pen an article by which the whole cou ntry is  
revolutionised? Is it intended? I do not know what the framers of this 
article mean by this. On a matter of such grave importan ce, I am very 
sorry to find that the framers or the draftsmen of this ar ticle have not 
bestowed sufficiently serious attention to that . Whether it is copied from 
anywhere or not, I do not know. Anyhow, if it is copie d from anywhere, I 
must condemn that provision even in that Constitution. It is very easy to 
copy sections from other constitutions of countries wh ere the 
circumstances are entirely different. There are ever s o many multitudes 
of communities following various customs for centurie s or thousands of 
years. By one stroke of the pen you want to annul all  that and make 
them uniform. What is the purpose served? What is the p urpose served 
by this uniformity except to murder the consciences of the people and 
make them feel that they are being trampled upon as re gards their 
religious rights and practices? Such a tyrannous mea sure ought not to 
find a place in our Constitution . I submit, Sir, there are ever so many 
sections of the Hindu community who are rebelling aga inst this and who 
voice forth their feelings in much stronger language th an I am using. If 
the framers of this article say that even the majority  community is 
uniform in support of this, I would challenge them to  say so. It is not so. 
Even assuming that the majority community is of this v iew, I say, it has 
to be condemned and it ought not to be allowed, because , in a 
democracy, as I take it, it is the duty of the majorit y to secure the sacred 
rights of every minority. It is a misnomer to call it a democracy if the 
majority rides rough-shod over the rights of the min orities. It is not 
democracy at all; it is tyranny . Therefore, I would submit to you and all 
the Members of this House to take very serious notice of  this article; it is 
not a light thing to be passed like this. 
In this connection, Sir, I would submit that I have giv en notice of an 
amendment to the Fundamental Right article also. This is only a 
Directive Principle.” 146 The above stated amendments proposed to draft Article 35  were opposed by 
K.M. Munshi and Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar.  Relevan t extracts of their 
responses are reproduced below: 
Shri K. M. Munshi (Bombay: General): Mr. Vice-Presi dent, I beg to 
submit a few considerations. This particular clause wh ich is now before 
the House is not brought for discussion for the first ti me. It has been 
discussed in several committees and at several places  before it came to 
the House. The ground that is now put forward against it is, firstly that it  
infringes the Fundamental Right mentioned in article 19;  and secondly, 
it is tyrannous to the minority . 
As regards article 19 the House accepted it and made it quite clear that-
"Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of a ny existing law or 
preclude the State from making any law (a) regulating or restricting"-I am 
omitting the unnecessary words-"or other secular activ ity which maybe 
associated with religious practices; (b) for social we lfare and reforms". 
Therefore the House has already accepted the principle  that if a religious 
practice followed so far covers a secular activity or  falls within the field of  
social reform or social welfare, it would be open to Parliament to make 
laws about it without infringing this Fundamental Right o f a minority . 
It must also be remembered that if this clause is not pu t in, it does not 
mean that the Parliament in future would have no right to enact a Civil 
Code. The only restriction touch a right would be articl e 19 and I have 
already pointed out that article 19, accepted by the Hou se unanimously, 
permits legislation covering secular activities. The wh ole object of this 
article is that as and when the Parliament thinks proper or rather when 
the majority in the Parliament thinks proper an attempt  may be made to 
unify the personal law of the country . 
A further argument has been advanced that the enactment of  a Civil 
Code would be tyrannical to minorities. Is it tyrannic al? Nowhere in 
advanced Muslim countries the personal law of each mi nority has been 
recognised as so sacrosanct as to prevent the enactmen t of a Civil Code. 
Take for instance Turkey or Egypt. No minority in the se countries is  
permitted to have such rights. But I go further. When the  Shariat Act 
was passed or when certain laws were passed in the Ce ntral Legislature 
in the old regime, the Khojas and Cutchi Memons were highly 
dissatisfied . 
They then followed certain Hindu customs; for generati ons since they 
became converts they had done so. They did not want to c onform to the 
Shariat; and yet by legislation of the Central Legislatur e certain Muslim 
members who felt that Shariat law should be enforced u pon the whole 
community carried their point. The Khojas and Cutchi Memons most 
unwillingly had to submit to it. Where were the rights o f minority then? 
When you want to consolidate a community, you have to take into 
consideration the benefit which may accrue to the whole  community and 
motto the customs of a part of it. It is not therefore cor rect to say that 147 such an act is tyranny of the majority. If you will l ook at the countries in 
Europe which have a Civil Code, everyone who goes th ere from any part 
of the world and every minority, has to submit to the C ivil Code. It is not 
felt to be tyrannical to the minority. The point howeve r is this, whether 
we are going to consolidate and unify our personal la w in such a way 
that the way of life of the whole country may in cours e of time be unified 
and secular. We want to divorce religion from persona l law, from what 
may be called social relations or from the rights of p arties as regards 
inheritance or succession. What have these things got to  do with religion 
I really fail to understand.  Take for instance the Hindu Law Draft which 
is before the Legislative Assembly. If one looks at Ma nu and 
Yagnyavalkya and all the rest of them, I think most of the provisions of 
the new Bill will run counter to their injunctions. But a fter all we are an 
advancing society. We are in a stage where we must un ify and 
consolidate the nation by every means without interfering  with religious 
practices. If however the religious practices in the pa st have been so 
construed as to cover the whole field of life, we have  reached a point 
when we must put our foot down and say that these matters  are not 
religion, they are purely matters for secular legisl ation. This is what is 
emphasised by this article. 
Now look at the disadvantages that you will perpetuate if  there is no Civil 
Code. Take for instance the Hindus. We have the law of  Mayukha 
applying in some parts of India; we have Mithakshara in others; and we 
have the law-Dayabagha in Bengal. In this way even the  Hindus 
themselves have separate laws and most of our Provinc es and States 
have started making separate Hindu law for themselve s. Are we going to 
permit this piecemeal legislation on the ground that it a ffects the 
personal law of the country? It is therefore not merely a question for 
minorities but it also affects the majority. 
I know there are many among Hindus who do not like a  uniform Civil 
Code, because they take the same view as the honourable  Muslim 
Members who spoke last. They feel that the personal la w of inheritance, 
succession etc. is really apart of their religion. If that were so, you can 
never give, for instance, equality to women. But you  have already passed 
a Fundamental Right to that effect and you have an artic le here which 
lays down that there should be no discrimination aga inst sex. Look at 
Hindu Law; you get any amount of discrimination agains t women; and if 
that is part of Hindu religion or Hindu religious prac tice, you cannot 
pass a single law which would elevate the position o f Hindu women to  
that of men. Therefore, there is no reason why there s hould not be a civil 
code throughout the territory of India . 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Shri Alladi Krishanaswami Ayyar (Madras: General): Mr. Vice-President, 
after the very full exposition of my friend the Honour able Mr. Munshi, it 
is not necessary to cover the whole ground. But it is as  well to 
understand whether there can be any real objection to t he article as it 
runs. 148 "The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a  uniform civil code 
throughout the territory of India ." 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
Now, my friend Mr. Pocker levelled an attack against t he Drafting 
Committee on the ground that they did not know their bus iness. I should 
like to know whether he has carefully read what happe ned even in the 
British regime. You must know that the Muslim law cove rs the field of 
contracts, the field of criminal law, the field of div orce law, the field of 
marriage and every part of law as contained in the M uslim law. When the 
British occupied this country, they said, we are going  to introduce one 
criminal law in this country which will be applicable  to all citizens, be 
they Englishmen, be they Hindus, be they Muslims. Did the Muslims 
take exception, and did they revolt against the British f or introducing a 
single system of criminal law? Similarly we have the law of contracts 
governing transactions between Muslims and Hindus, b etween Muslims 
and Muslims. They are governed not by the law of the K oran but by the 
Anglo-Indian jurisprudence, yet no exception was taken  to that. Again, 
there are various principles in the law of transfer w hich have been 
borrowed from the English jurisprudence . 
Therefore, when there is impact between two civilizat ions or between two 
cultures, each culture must be influenced and influenc e the other 
culture. If there is a determined opposition, or if the re is strong 
opposition by any section of the community, it would b e unwise on the 
part of the legislators of this country to attempt to ignor e it. Today, even 
without article 35, there is nothing to prevent the futur e Parliament of 
India from passing such laws. Therefore, the idea is  to have a uniform 
civil code . 
Now, again, there are Muslims and there are Hindus,  there are Catholics, 
there are Chistians, there are Jews, indifferent Europ ean countries. I 
should like to know from Mr.Pocker whether different personal laws are 
perpetuated in France, in Germany, in Italy and in al l the continental 
countries of Europe, or whether the laws of successio n aren’t co-
ordinated and unified in the various States. He must hav e made a 
detailed study of Muslim jurisprudence and found out w hether in all 
those countries, there is a single system of law or dif ferent systems of 
law. 
Leave alone people who are there. Today, even in reg ard to people in 
other parts of the country, if they have property in the continent of 
Europe where the German Civil Code or the French Civi l Code obtains, 
the people are governed by the law of the place in ver y many respects. 
Therefore, it is incorrect to say that we are invading th e domain of 
religion. Under the Moslem law, unlike under Hindu l aw, marriage is 
purely a civil contract. The idea of a sacrament doe s not enter into the 
concept of marriage in Muslim jurisprudence though th e incidence of the 
contract may be governed by what is laid down in the K oran and by 
theater jurists. Therefore, there is no question of rel igion being in danger. 
Certainly no Parliament, no Legislature will be so un wise as to attempt 
it, apart from the power of the Legislature to interfere with religious 149 tenets of peoples. After all the only community that is willing to adapt  
itself to changing times seems to be the majority commun ity in the 
country. They are willing to take lessons from the min ority and adapt 
their Hindu Laws and take a leaf from the Muslims for the purpose of 
reforming even the Hindu Law. Therefore, there is no force to the 
objection that is put forward to article 35 . The future Legislatures may 
attempt a uniform Civil Code or they may not. The unifo rm Civil Code 
will run into every aspect of Civil Law. In regard to  contracts, procedure 
and property uniformity is sought to be secured by th eir finding a place 
in the Concurrent List. In respect of these matters the greatest 
contribution of British jurisprudence has been to brin g about a 
uniformity in these matters. We only go a step further than the British 
who ruled in this country. Why should you distrust much  more a 
national indigenous Government than a foreign Governm ent which has 
been ruling? Why should our Muslim friends have gre ater confidence, 
greater faith in the British rule than in a democratic rule which will 
certainly have regard to the religious tenets and belie fs of all people? 
Therefore, for those reasons, I submit that the House m ay unanimously 
pass this article which has been placed before the Mem bers after due 
consideration.” 
 
Before the amendments were put to vote, Dr. B.R. Ambedke r made the 
following observations: 
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, I am afraid  I cannot accept the 
amendments which have been moved to this article. In d ealing with this 
matter, I do not propose to touch on the merits of the que stion as to 
whether this country should have a Civil Code or it s hould not. That is a 
matter which I think has been dealt with sufficiently f or the occasion by 
my friend, Mr. Munshi, as well as by Shri Alladi Kr ishnaswami Ayyar. 
When the amendments to certain fundamental rights are mo ved, it 
would be possible for me to make a full statement on th is subject, and I 
therefore do not propose to deal with it here . 
My friend, Mr. Hussain Imam, in rising to support th e amendments, 
asked whether it was possible and desirable to have a uniform Code of 
laws for a country so vast as this is. Now I must conf ess that I was very 
much surprised at that statement, for the simple reason that we have in 
this country a uniform code of laws covering almost e very aspect of  
human relationship. We have a uniform and complete C riminal Code 
operating throughout the country, which is contained in th e Penal Code 
and the Criminal Procedure Code. We have the Law of Transfer of 
Property, which deals with property relations and wh ich is operative 
throughout the country. Then there are the Negotiable Ins truments Acts: 
and I can cite innumerable enactments which would prov e that this  
country has practically a Civil Code, uniform in its c ontent and 
applicable to the whole of the country. The only provi nce the Civil Law 
has not been able to invade so far is Marriage and Su ccession. It is this 150 little corner which we have not been able to invade so  far and it is the 
intention of those who desire to have article 35 as part of the 
Constitution to bring about that change. Therefore, the argument 
whether we should attempt such a thing seems to me somewh at 
misplaced for the simple reason that we have, as a ma tter of fact, 
covered the whole lot of the field which is covered b y a uniform Civil 
Code in this country. It is therefore too late now to ask  the question 
whether we could do it. As I say, we have already don e it . 
Coming to the amendments, there are only two observatio ns which I 
would like to make. My first observation would be to sta te that members 
who put forth these amendments say that the Muslim persona l law, so 
far as this country was concerned, was immutable and u niform through 
the whole of India. Now I wish to challenge that statemen t. I think most 
of my friends who have spoken on this amendment have quite forgotten 
that up to 1935 the North-West Frontier Province was not subject to the 
Shariat Law. It followed the Hindu Law in the matter of  succession and 
in other matters, so much so that it was in 1939 that the Central 
Legislature had to come into the field and to abrogate t he application of 
the Hindu Law to the Muslims of the North-West Frontier P rovince and 
to apply the Shariat Law to them. That is not all. 
My honourable friends have forgotten, that, apart from the North-West 
Frontier Province, up till 1937 in the rest of India, in various parts, such 
as the United Provinces, the Central Provinces and Bomb ay, the Muslims 
to a large extent were governed by the Hindu Law in th e matter of 
succession. In order to bring them on the plane of u niformity with regard 
to the other Muslims who observed the Shariat Law, the Legislature had 
to intervene in 1937 and to pass an enactment applying the Shariat Law 
to the rest of India. 
I am also informed by my friend, Shri Karunakara Me non, that in North 
Malabar the Marumakkathayam Law applied to all-not onl y to Hindus 
but also to Muslims. It is to be remembered that the Maru makkathayam 
Law is a Matriarchal form of law and not a Partriarcha l form of law. 
The Mussulmans, therefore, in North Malabar were up to  now following 
the Marumakkathyam law. It is therefore no use making a  categorical 
statement that the Muslim law has been an immutable law w hich they 
have been following from ancient times. That law as su ch was not 
applicable in certain parts and it has been made appli cable ten years 
ago. Therefore if it was found necessary that for the purpose of evolving a 
single civil code applicable to all citizens irrespe ctive of their religion, 
certain portions of the Hindus, law, not because they w ere contained in 
Hindu law but because they were found to be the most su itable, were 
incorporated into the new civil code projected by arti cle 35, I am quite 
certain that it would not be open to any Muslim to say tha t the framers 
of the civil code had done great violence to the sentime nts of the Muslim 
community. 
My second observation is to give them an assurance . I quite realise their 
feelings in the matter, but I think they have read rath er too much into 
article 35, which merely proposes that the State shall endeavour to 151 secure a civil code for the citizens of the country . It does not say that 
after the Code is framed the State shall enforce it upo n all citizens merely 
because they are citizens. It is perfectly possible that the future 
parliament may make a provision byway of making a be ginning that the 
Code shall apply only to those who make a declaration  that they are 
prepared to be bound by it, so that in the initial stage the application of 
the Code may be purely voluntary. Parliament may feel the ground by 
some such method. This is not a novel method. It was ad opted in the 
Shariat Act of 1937 when it was applied to territories ot her than the 
North-West Frontier Province. The law said that here is a Shariat law 
which should be applied to Mussulmans who wanted that he should be 
bound by the Shariat Act should go to an officer of the  state, make a 
declaration that he is willing to be bound by it, and after he has made 
that declaration the law will bind him and his successo rs. It would be 
perfectly possible for parliament to introduce a provis ion of that sort; so 
that the fear which my friends have expressed here wil l be altogether 
nullified. I therefore submit that there is no substance  in these 
amendments and I oppose them .” 
 
When the matter was put to vote by the Vice President of th e Constituent 
Assembly, it was resolved as under: 
“Mr. Vice-President: The question is: 
"That the following proviso be added to article 35: 
`Provided that any group, section or community or peop le shall not be 
obliged to give up its own personal law in case it has  such a law'." 
The motion was negatived.” 
 
Based on the Constituent Assembly debates with referenc e to draft Article 
35, which was incorporated in the Constitution as Artic le 44 (extracted 
above), it was submitted, that as expressed in Article 25 (2)(b), so also the 
debates of Article 44, the intent of the Constituent Assem bly was to protect 
‘personal laws’ of different communities by elevating  their stature to that of 
other fundamental rights, however with the rider, that th e legislature was 
competent to amend the same. 
95. Sequentially, learned senior counsel invited our attention to the 
Constituent Assembly debates with reference to Article 2 5 so as to bring 152 home his contention, that the above article preserved to all their ‘personal 
laws’ by elevating the same to the stature of a fundamenta l right.  The 
instant elevation, it was pointed out, was by incorporati ng Articles 25 and 
26 as components of Part III – Fundamental Rights, of the Constitution.  It 
would be relevant to record, that Article 25 as it now ex ists, was debated as 
draft Article 19 by the Constituent Assembly.  It was po inted out, that only 
one amendment proposed by Mohamed Ismail Sahib and its response by Pt. 
Laxmikanta Mitra would bring home the proposition bein g canvassed, 
namely, that ‘personal laws’ were inalienable rights o f individuals and 
permitted them to be governed in consonance with their faith.  The 
amendment proposed by Mohamed Ismail Sahib and his s tatement in that 
behalf before the Constituent Assembly, as is relevant for the present 
controversy, is being extracted hereunder: 
“Mr. Mohamed Ismail Sahib: Thank you very much, Sir , forgiving me 
another opportunity to put my views before the House o n this very 
important matter. I beg to move: 
"That after clause (2) of article 19, the following new  clause be added: 
‘(3) Nothing in clause (2) of this article shall affec t the right of any citizen 
to follow the personal law of the group or the commun ity to which he 
belongs or professes to belong.'" 
Sir, this provision which I am suggesting would only recognise the age 
long right of the people to follow their own personal  law, within the limits 
of their families and communities. This does not affec t in any way the 
members of other communities. This does not encroach u pon the rights 
of the members of other communities to follow their own personal law. It 
does not mean any sacrifice at all on the part of the m embers of any 
other community. Sir, here what we are concerned with is only the 
practice of the members of certain families coming un der one 
community. It is a family practice and in such cases  as succession, 
inheritance and disposal of properties by way of wakf  and will, the 
personal law operates. It is only with such matters that we are concerned  
under personal law. In other matters, such as evidenc e, transfer of 
property, contracts and in innumerable other questions  of this sort, the 
civil code will operate and will apply to every citiz en of the land, to 153 whatever community he may belong. Therefore, this wil l not in any way 
detract from the desirable amount of uniformity which  the state may try 
to bring about, in the matter of the civil law . 
This practice of following personal law has been ther e amongst the 
people for ages. What I want under this amendment is th at that practice 
should not be disturbed now and I want only the conti nuance of a 
practice that has been going on among the people for ag es past . On a 
previous occasion Dr. Ambedkar spoke about certain e nactments 
concerning Muslim personal law, enactments relating to Wakf, Shariat 
law and Muslim marriage law. Here there was no questi on of the 
abrogation of the Muslim personal law at all. There wa s no revision at all 
and in all those cases what was done was that the Musl im personal law 
was elucidated and it was made clear that these laws sha ll apply to the 
Muslims. They did not modify them at all. Therefore those enactments 
and legislations cannot be cited now as matters of prece dents for us to 
do anything contravening the personal law of the peopl e. Under this 
amendment what I want the House to accept is that when we speak of 
the State doing anything with reference to the secular as pect of religion, 
the question of the personal law shall not be brought in and it shall not 
be affected . 
xxx   xxx   xxx 
The question of professing, practising and propagating  one’s faith is a 
right which the human being had from the very beginni ng of time and 
that has been recognised as an inalienable right of ev ery human being, 
not only in this land but the whole world over and I t hink that nothing 
should be done to affect that right of man as a human be ing. That part of 
the article as it stands is properly worded and it shou ld stand as it is. 
That is my view . 
Another honourable Member spoke about the troubles that had arisen as 
a result of the propagation of religion. I would say that the troubles were 
not the result of the propagation of religion or the pr ofessing or 
practicing of religion . They arose as a result of the misunderstanding of 
religion . My point of view, and I say that that is the correct point of view, 
is that if only people understand their respective relig ions aright and if 
they practise them aright in the proper manner there wo uld be no 
trouble whatever; and because there was some trouble du e to some 
cause it does not stand to reason that the fundamental ri ght of a human 
being to practise and propagate his religion should be  abrogated in any 
way.” 
The response of Pt. Laxmikanta Mitra is reproduced bel ow: 
“Pandit Lakshmi Kanta Mitra (West Bengal: General): Sir , I feel myself 
called upon to put in a few words to explain the ge neral implications of 
this article so as to remove some of the misconception s that have arisen 
in the minds of some of my honourable Friends over i t. 
This article 19 of the Draft Constitution confers on all  person the right to 
profess, practise and propagate any religion they lik e but this right has 
been circumscribed by certain conditions which the Sta te would be free 
to impose in the interests of public morality, public o rder and public 154 health and also in so far as the right conferred her e does not conflict in 
any way with the other provisions elaborated under thi s part of the 
Constitution. Some of my Friends argued that this right ought not to be 
permitted in this Draft Constitution for the simple rea son that we have 
declared time and again that this is going to be a secu lar State and as 
such practice of religion should not be permitted as a  fundamental right. 
It has been further argued that by conferring the additi onal right to 
propagate a particular faith or religion the door is opened for all manner  
of troubles and conflicts which would eventually paral yse the normal life 
of the State. I would say at once that this conception of a secular State is 
wholly wrong. (By secular State, as I understand it, is  meant that the 
State is not going to make any discrimination whatsoever  on the ground  
of religion or community against any person professi ng any particular 
form of religious faith. This means in essence that no  particular religion 
in the State will receive any State patronage whatsoever . The State is not 
going to establish, patronise or endow any particular religion to the 
exclusion of or in preference to others and that no ci tizen in the State 
will have any preferential treatment or will be discrim inated against 
simply on the ground that he professed a particular fo rm of religion. In 
other words in the affairs of the State the professing o f any particular 
religion will not be taken into consideration at all. ) This I consider to be 
the essence of a secular state. At the same time we must b e very careful 
to see that this land of ours we do not deny to anybody  the right not only 
to profess or practise but also to propagate any particu lar religion . Mr. 
Vice-President, this glorious land of ours is nothing  if it does not stand 
for lofty religious and spiritual concepts and ideal s. India would not be 
occupying any place of honour on this globe if she h ad not reached that 
spiritual height which she did in her glorious past.  Therefore I feel that 
the Constitution has rightly provided for this not only  as a right but also 
as a fundamental right. In the exercise of this fundame ntal right every  
community inhabiting this State professing any religio n will have equal 
right and equal facilities to do whatever it likes in accordance with its 
religion provided it does not clash with the condition s laid down here .” 
 
In addition to the above, it is only relevant to mention,  that the amendment 
proposed by Mohamed Ismail Sahib was negatived by th e Constituent 
Assembly. 
96. While concluding his submissions Mr. Kapil Siba l, learned Senior 
Advocate, focused his attention to the Muslim Personal La w (Shariat) 
Application, 1937 and invited our attention to some o f the debates which 
had taken place when the Bill was presented before the  Legislative 155 Assembly.  Reference is only necessary to the statemen ts made by H.M. 
Abdullah and Abdul Qaiyum on the floor of the House .  The same are 
extracted hereunder: 
“Mr H. M. Abdullah (West Central Punjab: Muhammadan):  Sir, I beg to 
move: "That the Bill to make provision for the applic ation of the Moslem 
Personal Law (Shariat) to Moslems in British India, as reported by the 
Select Committee, be taken into consideration."  
The object of the Bill, as the House is already aware,  is to replace the 
customary law by the Shari at law in certain matters whe re the parties to 
a dispute are Muslims. By doing so, it also helps the weaker sex as it 
enables women to succeed to the ancestral property and to claim 
dissolution of marriage on certain grounds . After explaining the object of 
the Bill briefly, it gives me great pleasure to say that the Bill has met 
with a unanimous support from the Select Committee excep t in one or 
two points. Objection has been taken to the words "or L aw" in clause 2 of 
the Bill by Messrs Mudie, Muhammad Azhar Ali and Sir  Muhammad 
Yarnin Khan in their minutes of dissent. As there is an  amendment on 
the agenda for the omission of these words, I shall d eal with it when it is 
moved. Meanwhile, I would confine my remarks to the m odifications 
suggested by the Select Committee. The main changes mad e by it are 
two, one relating to the exclusion of the agricultural land from the 
purview of the Bill, and the other concerning the ampli fication of the 
word "divorce" . As succession to agricultural land is an exclusiv ely 
provincial subject under the Government of India Act, 1 935, it had, 
much against my wish, to be excluded from the Bill. Ha ving regard to the 
different forms of dissolution of marriage recognise d by the Shariat, it 
was considered necessary to provide for all of them. In order to 
implement the provisions in this respect, a new clause  3 has been 
inserted in the Bill empowering the District Judge to gr ant dissolution of 
marriage on petition of a married Muslim woman on cer tain grounds. 
These changes have been introduced in the interest of th e females who, 
in such matters, are at present at the mercy of their hus bands .  
I am sure that these wholesome changes will be support ed by the House. 
In addition to the above, the Select Committee have mad e a few other 
amendments which are fully explained in the report, an d I need not take 
the time of the House in dilating upon them. I hope that the Bill in its 
present form will meet with the approval of the whole H ouse.  
Sir, I move.  
Mr Deputy President (Mr Akhil Chandra Dattas): Motion m oved: "That 
the Bill to make provision for the application of the Moslem Personal Law 
(Shariat) to Moslems in British India, as reported b y the Select 
Committee, be taken into consideration."  
Mr Abdul Qaiyum (North-West Frontier Province: Genera l): Sir, I am in 
sympathy with the objects which this very useful Bill  aims at. There is a 
great awakening among the Muslim masses, and they are  terribly 156 conscious of their wretched condition socially, politi cally and 
economically. There is a desire in the 107 108 Appen dix B community for 
an advance in all these directions. The feelings of the Muslim community 
have been expressed in public meetings throughout the  length and 
breadth of this country. This feeling, I have great ple asure in stating, is 
not merely confined to males but it has spread to the fem ales also, and 
for the first time the Muslim women in India have give n expression to 
their strong feelings against the dead hand of customary  law which has 
reduced them into the position of chattels. Sir, these fee lings have been 
expressed by various organisations of Muslim women throughout India. 
A representative body of Muslim Ulema like the Jamait- ulUlemai-Hind 
has also expressed its sympathy with the objects of this  Bill. Sir, there is 
something in the word Shariat, -may be it is Arabic, -  which gives a sort 
of fright to some of my Honourable friends, but I thin k if they try to read 
the Muhammadan Law on the point, especially on the poi nt of 
succession, they will realise that this Bill was long overdue and that it is 
a step in the right direction. People have no idea of w hat terrible 
conditions the Muslim women have had to endure in my own Province : I 
can say that whenever a Muslim died, at least before th e Frontier Shariat 
Law was enacted in the North-West Frontier Province, h is daughter, his 
sister and his wife all used to be thrown into the stree t, and the 
reversioner in the tenth degree would come round and collar all his 
property. I think that the conscience of all those who  believe in progress, 
social, political and economic will revolt against suc h practice and once 
people realise that this Bill is primarily intended to i mprove the status of 
women and to confer upon them benefits which are lawfu lly their due 
under the Muhammadan law, then they will gladly suppor t this measure . 
'Custom' is a very indefinite term. I know it as a l awyer that in my 
Province whenever a question of custom used to crop up  it used to 
involve any amount of research work, lawyers used to indulge in 
research work to find out cases, look up small books  on customary law 
and it was found that the custom varied from tribe to tr ibe, from village 
to village and it has been held, by the High Court in our Province before 
the Shariat Act came into force, that custom varied from o ne part of the 
village to the other. The position was so uncertain that p eople had to 
spend so much money on litigation that by the time litiga tion came to an 
end the property for which people were fighting would  disappear. It was 
with a view to put an end to this uncertainty that people in the Frontier 
Province pressed for an Act which was subsequently pa ssed into law .  
I have only one thing to say. Personally I want the Mus lims in India in 
matters affecting them to follow the personal law of the  Muslims as far as 
they can. I want them to move in this direction because it is a thing 
which is going to help the Muslims and because the Mus lims form a very 
important minority community in this country- they are 80 millions - all 
well-wishers of this country will agree with me that if it enhances the 
states of Muslims, if it brings the much needed relief to the Muslim 
women, it will be a good thing for the cause of the In dian nation . 
Therefore, in our Province an Act was passed which g oes much further 157 than this particular Bill which is now under discussi on before this 
House. It is a very well-known fact that under the new G overnment of 
India Act, agricultural land and waqfs and religious  trusts are provincial 
subjects and that this Honourable House cannot legislat e about matters 
which are now on the provincial legislative list. The  Act which we have in 
the Frontier Province, Act VI of 1935, goes much furthe r than this Bill 
because it includes agricultural land and religious trusts. Therefore, I 
have tabled an amendment that this particular Bill - tho ugh I heartily 
agree with the principles of Appendix B 109 the Bill -  when enacted into 
law, should not be extended to our Province. If it is so extended, it would 
mean that the people of the Frontier Province would be ta king a step 
backward and not forwards. It is well-known fact and it is laid down in 
the Government of India Act, Section 107, that where a Fe deral Law 
comes into conflict with a Provincial Law and even if  the Federal Law has 
been passed after the Provincial Law, then to that ext ent it over-rides the 
Provincial law and the Provincial Law becomes null a nd void. Therefore, 
my submission is that the intention with which I tabled m y amendment 
was not with any idea of opposing the object of this Bi ll, but my reason 
for moving this amendment is that this Bill does not go as far as we wish 
to go -at least in one Province, namely, the North-West F rontier Province. 
I submit this is a measure which has been long overdu e. I have known 
cases where a widow who was enjoying life estate - a nd whose 
reversioners were waiting for her death - did not die but happened to 
have a very long life. There have been cases in the  Northwest Frontier 
Province where people have taken the law into their own  hands and in 
order to get the property they have murdered the widow. I can cite other 
cases before this Honourable House. There have been cases which I have 
come across in my legal and professional career whe re, when a man dies 
leaving a wife who by customary law has to enjoy the property till her 
death or remarriage, certain reversioners come forwar d and bring a suit 
to declare that the widow had married one of the reversi oners with a view 
to proving that she was no longer a widow and with a v iew to terminate 
her life estate . There have been numerous cases where families hav e 
been ruined, murderers and stabbings have taken place  because the 
dead hand of customary law stood in the way of the re versioners who 
were anxious to get what they could not get and in orde r to deprive the 
poor widow, false cases have been tromped up that she had remarried. 
There have been many other illegal tricks resorted to by people with a 
view to get hold of the property. I submit, Sir, that the  dead hand of 
customary law must be removed. We are living in an ag e in which very 
important changes are taking place. After all this custom ary law is a 
thing of the past When many other things are going the w ay of all flesh, 
when even systems of Government have to change, when e ven mighty 
Empires have disappeared, when we see signs of softe ning even in the 
hearts of the Government of India, when we have got pop ular Congress 
Governments in seven Provinces - a thing which nobody  would have 
believed six months ago or one year ago. I submit tha t it is high time that 
we got rid of this dead hand of custom. After all cust om is a horrible 158 thing as far as this particular matter is concerned, and  by endorsing the 
principles of this Bill we would be doing justice to millions of Indian 
women who profess Muslim faith. I hope, Sir, the day is not far off when 
other communities will also bring similar measures a nd when in India 
women and men will be treated equally in the eyes of  law in the matter of 
property, political rights, social rights and in al l other respects. I have, 
therefore, great pleasure in supporting the principles  of this Bill .” 
 
Based on the aforesaid debates and the details expres sed hereinabove (-for 
details, refer to Part-4 – Legislation in India, in th e field of Muslim ‘personal 
law’), it was contended, that the main object of the legis lation was not to 
express the details of the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘S hariat’.  The object was 
merely to do away with customs and usages as were in  conflict with Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  It was therefore submitted , that it would not be 
proper to hold, that by the Shariat Act, the legislature g ave statutory status 
to Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  It would be nec essary to understand 
the above enactment, as statutorily  abrogating customary  practices and 
usages, as were in conflict with the existing Muslim ‘ personal law’ – 
‘Shariat’.  It was submitted, that the above enactment did not decide what 
was, or was not, Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  It would therefore be a 
misnomer to consider that the Muslim Personal Law (Shar iat) Application 
Act, 1937, in any way, legislated on the above subject.   It was pointed out, 
that Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’ comprised of the  declarations 
contained in the Quran, or through ‘hadiths’, ‘ijmas’  and ‘qiyas’ (-for details, 
refer to Part-2 – The practiced modes of ‘talaq’ among st Muslims).  It was 
pointed out, that the articles of faith, as have been exp ressed on a variety of 
subjects of Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, have b een in place ever since 
they were declared by the Prophet Mohammed.  Insofar a s the practice of 159 ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is concerned, it was submitted, that it h as been practised 
amongst Muslims for the last 1400 years.  It was submit ted, that the same 
is an accepted mode of divorce amongst Muslims.  It w as therefore urged, 
that it was not for this Court to decide, whether the afores aid practice was 
just and equitable.  The reason for this Court not to in terfere with the same, 
it was submitted was, that the same was a matter of faith, of a majority of 
Muslims in this country, and this Court would be well a dvised to leave such 
a practice of faith, to be determined in the manner as was considered fit by 
those who were governed thereby.  A belief, according  to learned senior 
counsel, which is practiced for 1400 years, is a matt er of faith, and is 
protected under Article 25 of the Constitution.  Matters o f belief and faith, it 
was submitted, have been accepted to constitute the funda mental rights of 
the followers of the concerned religion.  Only  such practices of faith, 
permitted to be interfered with under Article 25(1), as are opposed to public 
order, morality and health.  It was pointed out, that in addition to the 
above, a court could interfere only when articles of f aith violated the 
provisions of Part III – Fundamental Rights, of the Con stitution.  Insofar as 
the reliance placed by the petitioners on Articles 14, 1 5 and 21 is 
concerned, it was submitted, that Articles 14, 15 and 21 are obligations 
cast on the State, and as such, were clearly inapplica ble to matters of 
‘personal law’, which cannot be attributed to State action.  
97. While concluding his submissions, learned senio r counsel also 
affirmed, that he would file an affidavit on behalf of  the AIMPLB.  The 
aforesaid affidavit was duly filed, which reads as u nder: 160 “1.  I am the Secretary of All India Muslim Personal  Law Board which has 
been arraigned as Respondent No.3 and as Respondent N o.8 respectively 
to the above-captioned Writ Petitions.  I am conversant wi th the facts 
and circumstances of the present case and I am compete nt to swear this 
Affidavit. 
2. I say and submit that the All India Muslim Personal Law Board will 
issue an advisory through its Website, Publications an d Social Media 
Platforms and thereby advise the persons who perform ‘Nikah’ (marriage) 
and request them to do the following:-  
(a) At the time of performing ‘Nikah’ (Marriage), the person performing 
the ‘Nikah’ will advise the Bridegroom/Man that in cas e of differences 
leading to Talaq the Bridegroom/Man shall not pronounc e three divorces 
in one sitting since it is an undesirable practice in S hariat;  
(b) That at the time of performing ‘Nikah’ (Marriage) , the person 
performing the ‘Nikah’ will advise both the Bridegroo m/Man and the 
Bride/Woman to incorporate a condition in the ‘Nikahnam a’ to exclude 
resorting to pronouncement of three divorces by her hu sband in one 
sitting . 
3. I say and submit that, in addition, the Board is pla cing on record, that 
the Working Committee of the Board had earlier already passed certain 
resolutions in the meeting held on 15 th  and 16 th  April, 2017 in relation to 
Divorce (Talaq) in the Muslim community.  Thereby it was resolved to 
convey a code of conduct/guidelines to be followed in  the matters of 
divorce particularly emphasizing to avoid pronounceme nt of three 
divorces in one sitting .  A copy of the resolution dated April 16, 2017 
alongwith the relevant Translation of Resolution Nos.  2, 3, 4 & 5 relating 
to Talaq (Divorce) is enclosed herewith for the perus al of this Hon’ble 
Court and marked as Annexure A-1 (Colly) [Page Nos.4  to 12] to the 
present Affidavit.” 
 
Based on the above affidavit, it was contended, that soc ial reforms with 
reference to ‘personal law’ must emerge from the conce rned community 
itself.  It was reiterated, that no court should have a ny say in the matter of 
reforms to ‘personal law’.  It was submitted, that it was  not within the 
domain of judicial discretion to interfere with the ma tters of ‘personal law’ 
except on grounds depicted in Article 25(1) of the Con stitution.  It was 
contended, that the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was not li able to be set aside, 
on any of the above grounds. 161 98. While supplementing the contentions noticed in the preceding 
paragraph, it was submitted, that Article 25(2)(b) vested  the power with the 
legislature, to interfere with ‘personal law’ on the gro und of social welfare 
and reform.  It was therefore contended, that the prayer made by the 
petitioner and those supporting the petitioner’s case bef ore this Court, 
should be addressed to the members of the community wh o are competent 
to amend the existing traditions, and alternatively to the legislature which is 
empowered to legislatively abrogate the same, as a meas ure of social welfare 
and reform.  With the above observations, learned seni or counsel prayed for 
the rejection of the prayers made by the petitioners. 
99. Mr. Raju Ramachandran, Senior Advocate, entered appearance on 
behalf of Jamiat Ulema-i-Hind, i.e., respondent no.1 in Suo Motu Writ 
Petition (Civil) No.2 of 2015 and respondent no.9 in W rit Petition (Civil) 
No.118 of 2016.  At the beginning of his submissions , learned senior 
counsel stated, that he desired to endorse each one of the submissions 
advanced before this Court by Mr. Kapil Sibal, Senio r Advocate.  We 
therefore hereby record the aforesaid contention of lea rned senior counsel. 
100. In addition to the above, it was submitted, that the ca use raised by 
the petitioner (and others) before this Court was clearly  frivolous.  It was 
submitted, that under the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shari at’, parties at the 
time of executing ‘nikahnama’ (marriage deed) are fre e to incorporate terms 
and conditions, as may be considered suitable by them .  It was submitted, 
that it was open to the wife, at the time of executing ‘nika hnama’, to provide 
therein, that her husband would not have the right to divo rce her through a 162 declaration in the nature of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  It was the refore submitted, 
that it was clearly misconceived for the petitioner to ap proach this Court to 
seek a declaration against the validity of ‘talaq-e-bid dat’.  Alternatively, it 
was contended, that after the enactment of the Special M arriage Act, 1954, 
all citizens of India whether male or female, irrespe ctive of the faith they 
professed, have the option to be governed by the provi sions of the said Act, 
instead of their own ‘personal law’.  It was therefore  contended, that 
spouses belonging to a particular religious denominati on, had the choice to 
opt for a secular and non-religious law, namely, the Special Marriage Act, 
1954, and such of the parties who accept the choice (ev en if they profess 
the Muslim religion), would automatically escape from  all religious 
practices, including ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  It was therefore  contended, that such 
of the couples who married in terms of their ‘persona l law’, must be deemed 
to have exercised their conscious option to be regulate d by the ‘personal 
law’, under which they were married.  Having exercis ed the aforesaid 
option, it was submitted, that it was not open to a Musli m couple to then 
plead, against the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  It was submitted, that when 
parties consent to marry, their consent does not extend to the choice of the 
person with reference to whom the consent is extended, but it also implicitly 
extends to the law by which the matrimonial alliance s are to be regulated.  
If the consent is to marry in consonance with the ‘perso nal law’, then the 
rigours of ‘personal law’ would regulate the procedur e for dissolution of 
marriage.  And likewise, if the consent is to marry un der the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954, the consent is to be governed by th e provisions of the 163 aforesaid legislation.  In such a situation, it was su bmitted, that a person, 
who had consciously opted for the matrimonial alliance  under ‘personal law’ 
cannot complain, that the ‘personal law’ was unfavoura ble or 
discriminatory.  It was submitted, that in the above view  of the matter, the 
very filing of the instant petition before this Court, a nd the support of the 
petitioner’s cause by those who have been impleaded, or had appeared to 
represent the petitioner’s cause, must be deemed to be wh olly misconceived 
in law. 
101. The second submission advanced at the hands of th e learned senior 
counsel, was that the issues raised by the petitioner w ith reference to the 
validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq were matters  of legislative policy, 
and could not (though learned counsel truly meant – ou ght not) be 
interfered with through the judicial process.  In this behalf, learned senior 
counsel invited the Court’s attention to Maharshi Avadhesh  v. Union of 
India 32 , wherein the petitioner had approached this Court by fi ling a writ 
petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, with the fo llowing prayers: 
“(i) A writ of mandamus to the respondents to consider the question of 
enacting a common civil code for all citizens of Indi a. 
(ii) To declare Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 
as void being arbitrary and discriminatory and in vi olation of Articles 14 
and 15 and Articles 44, 38 39 and 39-A of the Constitu tion of India. 
(iii) To direct the respondents not to enact Shariat Act i n respect of those 
adversely affecting the dignity and rights of Muslim women and against 
their protection.” 
 
It was pointed out, that this Court dismissed the above wri t petition by 
observing, “these are all matters for legislature.  The  court cannot legislate 
on these matters.” 
                                                 
32  (1994) Suppl. (1) SCC 713 164 102. Reliance was also placed on the Ahmedabad Women  Action Group 
case 30 .  It was submitted that this Court considered the followin g issues 
during the course of adjudication of the above matter . 
“(i) Whether Muslim Personal Law which allows Polyga my is void as 
offending Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution. 
(ii) Whether Muslim Personal Law which enables a Mus lim male to give 
unilateral Talaq to his wife without her consent and wit hout resort to 
judicial process of courts, is void as it offends Arti cles 13, 14 and 15 of 
the Constitution. 
(iii) Whether the mere fact that a Muslim husband takes m ore than one 
wife is an act of cruelty.” 
 
103. It was pointed out, that having heard the above matt er, the same 
was dismissed by recording the following observations  in paragraph 4 of the 
judgment: 
“At the outset, we would like to state that these writ peti tions do not 
deserve disposal on merits inasmuch as the arguments a dvanced by the 
learned Senior Advocate before us wholly involve iss ues of State policies 
with which the Court will not ordinarily have any con cern.  Further, we 
find that when similar attempts were made, of course by  others, on 
earlier occasions this Court held that the remedy lies  somewhere else 
and not by knocking at the doors of the courts.” 
 
104. Having raised the two preliminary objections wit h reference to the 
entertainment of the prayer made by the petitioner, lear ned counsel invited 
the Court’s attention to abolition of the practice of ‘tala q-e-biddat’ in other 
countries.  It was submitted, that (-for details, refer to Part-5 – Abrogation 
of the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ by legislation, the  world over, in Islamic, as 
well as, non-Islamic States), the above contention was a dopted both by the 
petitioner, as well as, those who supported the petitioner ’s cause, as also by 
the Union of India, in order to contend, that the practice  of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
has been done away with in other Islamic countries, as a matter of social 
reform, on account of its being abhorrent, and also unilateral and arbitrary. 165 It was submitted, that the constitutional validity of ‘pers onal law’ in India, 
cannot be tested on the basis of enacted legislations  of other countries.  At 
this juncture, learned senior counsel desired us to no tice, that the instant 
submission had been advanced without prejudice to the contention being 
canvassed by him, that the validity of ‘personal law’ cannot be tested at all, 
with reference to the fundamental rights vested in indi viduals under Part III 
of the Constitution, for the reason, that ‘personal law’  cannot be treated as 
law within the meaning of Article 13 of the Constitutio n. 
105. Mr. Raju Ramachandran, learned senior counsel,  then endeavoured 
to establish the validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple ta laq.  It was submitted, 
that out of the five schools of Sunni Muslims ‘talaq-e-b iddat’ was considered 
a valid form of divorce of four of the said schools.   It was submitted, that the 
above position was accepted by the Delhi High Court in  the Masroor Ahmed 
case 4, wherein in paragraph 26, the High Court observed “… ..It is accepted 
by all schools of law that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is sinful,  yet some schools 
regarded it as valid…..”.  It has also been acknowled ged by the High Courts 
in different judgments rendered by them (-for details, refer to Part-6 – 
Judicial pronouncements, on  the subject of ‘talaq-e-b iddat’).  It was 
accordingly sought to be inferred, that once it was est ablished as a fact, 
that certain schools of Shia Muslims believed ‘talaq-e- biddat’ to be a valid 
form of divorce, the consequence that would follow wou ld be, that 
cohabitation amongst the spouses after the pronouncemen t of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ would be sinful, as per the injunction of the Q uran, in ‘sura’ 2, Al 
Baqara Ayah 230.  The same is reproduced hereunder: 166 “And if he has divorced her (for the third time), then  she is not lawful to 
him afterward until (after) she marries a husband othe r than him.  And if 
the latter husband divorces her (or dies), there is no  blame upon the 
woman and her former husband for returning to each o ther if they think 
that they can keep (within)the limits of Allah.  These are the limits of 
Allah, which He makes clear to a people who know.” 
 
It was pointed out, that the belief that after a husband ha s divorced his wife 
by pronouncing talaq thrice, it had been interfered that the three 
pronouncements should be treated as a singular pronou ncement.  It was 
pointd out, that High Courts have no such jurisdiction a s has been 
exercised by them on the subject of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  I t was accordingly 
asserted, that the above action constituted the creation of  inroads into 
‘personal law’ of Muslims, which stood protected und er Article 25 of the 
Constitution.  In this behalf, it was also submitted, th at while deciding the 
issue whether a belief or a practice constituted an inte gral part of religion, 
this Court held, that the above question needed to be ans wered on the basis 
of the views of the followers of the faith, and none el se.  In order to support 
his above submission, learned senior counsel, place d reliance on the Sardar 
Syedna Taher Saifuddin Saheb case 28 , wherein this Court observed as 
under: 
“The content of Articlles 25 and 26 of the Constitution came up for 
consideration before this Court in the Commissioner, H indu Religious 
Endowments Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur 
Matt; Mahant Jagannath Ramanuj Das v. The State of Ori ssa; Sri 
Ventatamana Devaru v. The State of Mysore; Durgah Comm ittee, Ajmer 
v. Syed Hussain Ali and several other cases and the main principles 
underlying these provisions have by these decisions  been placed beyond 
controversy.  The first is that the protection of these arti cles is not 
limited to matters of doctrine or belief they extend also to acts done in 
pursuance of religion and therefore contain a guarante e for rituals and 
observances, ceremonies and modes of worship which are integral parts 
of religion.  The second is that what constitutes an esse ntial part of a 
religious or religious practice has to be decided by the courts with 167 reference to the doctrine of a particular religion and include practices 
which are regarded by the community as a part of its religio n”. 
 
It was pointed out, that the above view of this Court had b een affirmed by 
this Court in N. Adithyan v. Travancore Devasom Board 33 , wherein in 
paragraphs 9 and 16, it was observed as under: 
“9. This Court, in Seshammal v. State of T.N., (1972 ) 2 SCC 11 again 
reviewed the principles underlying the protection eng rafted in Articles 25 
and 26 in the context of a challenge made to abolitio n of hereditary right 
of Archaka, and reiterated the position as hereunder :  (SCC p.21, paras 
13-14) 
“13. This Court in Sardar Taher Saifuddin Saheb v. State o f Bombay AIR 
1962 SC 853 has summarized the position in law as fol lows (pp.531 and 
532): 
‘The content of Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution came up for 
consideration before this Court in Commr., Hindu Relig ious Endowments 
v. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt,  Mahant 
Jagannath Ramanuj Das v. State of Orissa, Venkataraman a Devaru v. 
State of Mysore, Durgah Committee, Ajmer v. Syed Hussai n Ali15  and 
several other cases and the main principles underlyi ng these provisions 
have by these decisions been placed beyond controvers y.  The first is that 
the protection of these articles is not limited to matters of doctrine or 
belief they extend also to acts done in pursuance of  religion and therefore 
contain a guarantee for rituals and observances, cerem onies and modes 
of worship which are integral parts of religion.  Th e second is that what 
constitutes an essential part of a religion or religiou s practice has to be 
decided by the courts with reference to the doctrine of a particular 
religion and include practices which are regarded by  the community as a 
part of its religion .’ 
14. Bearing these principles in mind, we have to app roach the 
controversy in the present case.” 
16.  It is now well settled that Article 25 secures to eve ry person, subject 
of course to public order, health and morality and ot her provisions of 
Part III, including Article 17 freedom to entertain and exhibit by outward 
acts as well as propagate and disseminate such religio us belief according 
to his judgment and conscience  for the edification of others.  The right of 
the State to impose such restrictions as are desired or found necessary 
on grounds of public order, health and morality is i nbuilt in Articles 25 
and 26 itself.  Article 25(2)(b) ensures the right of the State to make a law 
providing for social welfare and reform besides thro wing open of Hindu 
religious institutions of a public character to all cl asses and sections of 
Hindus and any such rights of the Sate or of the commu nities or classes 
of society were also considered to need due regulatio n in the process of 
                                                 
33  (2002) 8 SCC 106 168 harmonizing the various rights .  The vision of the founding fathers of the 
Constitution to liberate the society from blind and ri tualistic adherence 
to mere traditional superstitious beliefs sans reason or  rational basis has 
found expression in the form of Article 17.  The lega l position that the 
protection under Articles 25 and 26 extends a guarante e for rituals and 
observances, ceremonies and modes of worship which are integral parts 
of religion and as to what really constitutes an essenti al part of religion 
or religious practice has to be decided by the courts w ith reference to the 
doctrine of a particular religion or practices regarde d as parts of religion, 
came to be equally firmly laid down .” 
 
In continuation of the above submission, learned seni or counsel also placed 
reliance on Sri Adi Visheshwara of Kashi Vishwanath Temple, Varanasi v. 
State of U.P. 34 , wherein this Court held as under: 
“28…..All secular activities which may be associated w ith religion but 
which do not relate or constitute an essential part of it m ay be amenable 
to State regulations but what constitutes the essential part o f religion 
may be ascertained primarily from the doctrines of tha t religion itself 
according to its tenets, historical background and c hange in evolved 
process etc.  The concept of essentiality is not itself  a determinative 
factor.  It is one of the circumstances to be considered  in adjudging 
whether the particular matters of religion or religious practices or belief 
are an integral part of the religion.  It must be deci ded whether the 
practices or matters are considered integral by the com munity itself .  
Though not conclusive, this is also one of the facets to  be noticed.  The 
practice in question is religious in character and whe ther it could be 
regarded as an integral and essential part of the reli gion and if the court 
finds upon evidence adduced before it that it is an int egral or essential 
part of the religion, Article 25 accords protection to i t. …..” 
 
It was the pointed contention of learned senior counsel,  that the judgments 
rendered by the High Courts on the subject of ‘talaq-e- biddat’ (-for details, 
refer to Part-6 – Judicial pronouncements, on the sub ject of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’), were unsustainable in law, because the High Courts had 
substituted their own views with reference to their under standing of ‘talaq-
e-biddat’.  It was also pointed out, that supplanting of  the views of one of 
the schools on the beliefs of the other four schools, of Sunni Muslims, with 
                                                 
34  (1997) 4 SCC 606 169 reference to ‘talaq-e-biddat’, was in clear breach of the understanding of 
Muslims. 
106. Learned senior counsel also disputed the relianc e on International 
Conventions by all those who had assisted this Court on behalf of the 
petitioner.  In this behalf, it was pointed out, that reli ance on International 
Conventions, particularly on CEDAW was wholly misplac ed, since India had 
expressed a clear reservation to the Conventions in ord er to support its 
constitutional policy of non-interference in the person al affairs of any 
community.  In this behalf, while making a particular  reference to CEDAW, 
it was submitted, that the above declarations/reservations were first made 
at the time of signing the aforesaid conventions and the reafter, even at the 
time of ratification.  In this behalf, it was pointed out,  that the first 
declaration was made by India in the following format: - 
“i) With regard to articles 5(a) and 16(1) of the Conve ntion on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discimination Against Wome n, the 
Governmetn of the Republic of India declares that it sha ll abide by and 
ensure these provisions in conformity with its policy  of non-interefernece 
in the personal affairs of any Community without its i nitiative and 
consent." 
 
In view of the clear stance adopted at the time of signin g the Convention, as 
also, at the time of its ratification, it was submitted, that there could be no 
doubt, that India had itself committed that it would not inte rfere with 
personal affairs of any community, without the initiati ve and consent of the 
concerned community.  It was submitted, that the aforesa id commitment 
could not be ignored by the Union of India.  While ad dressing this Court on 
the issue under reference, it was submitted, that the posi tion adopted by 170 the Union of India, was in clear derogation of the stan ce adopted on behalf 
of the India, as has been detailed above.  
107. Learned senior counsel also seriously disputed the submissions 
advanced at the hands of the petitioners based on repudi ation of the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ in various secular countr ies with Muslims in the 
majority, as also, theocratic States, through express l egislation on the issue 
(-for details, refer to Part-5 – Abrogation of the p ractice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ by 
legislation, the world over, in Islamic, as well as,  non-Islamic States).  In 
this behalf, it was submitted, that ‘personal law’ of cla sses and sections of 
the society and/or of religious denominations are sou ght to be protected by 
the Constitution by raising them to the high position of  fundamental rights.  
It was accordingly asserted, that what was available to  such classes and 
sections of society, as also, to the religious denomin ations as a matter of 
fundamental right under the Constitution, could not be n egated, because 
other countries had enacted legislations for such annu lment.  Further 
more, it was submitted, that legislation is based on the collective will of the 
residents of a particular country, and as such, the wil l of the residents of a 
foreign country, cannot be thrust upon the will of the r esidents in India.  
While adopting the position canvassed on behalf of lea rned senior counsel 
who had preceded him, it was pointed out, that it was ope n to the 
legislature in India, to likewise provide for such le gislation, because entry 5 
of the Concurrent List contained in the Seventh Schedule allows legislation 
even with reference to matters governed by ‘personal l aw’.  Additionally, it 
was submitted, that provision in this behalf was availa ble in Article 25(2)(b), 171 which provides that for espousing the cause of social  welfare and reform it 
was open to the legislature even to legislate on matters governed under 
‘personal law’.  It was therefore contended that all suc h submissions 
advanced on behalf of the petitioners need to be ignore d. 
108. Mr. V. Giri, Senior Advocate, entered appearanc e on behalf of 
Jamiat-ul-Ulama-i-Hind (represented by its General S ecretary, 1 Bahadur 
Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi) – respondent no.7 in Suo  Motu Writ Petition 
(Civil) No.2 of 2015 and respondent no.6 in Writ Petiti on (Civil) No. 118 of 
2016.  It would be relevant to mention, at the outset, that l earned senior 
counsel endorsed the submissions advanced by Mr. Kap il Sibal and Mr. 
Raju Ramachandra, Senior Advocates, who had assisted this Court before 
him.  Learned senior counsel focused his contentions,  firstly to the 
challenge raised to the validity of Section 2 of the Muslim Personal Law 
(Shariat) Application Act, 1937, insofar as, it relate s to ‘talaq-e-biddat’ on 
the ground, that the same being unconstitutional, was unenforceable.  
Learned senior counsel, in order to raise his challe nge, first and foremost, 
drew our attention to Sections 2 and 3 of the Muslim Pers onal Law  (Shariat) 
Application Act, 1937 (-for details, refer to Part-4 –  Legislation in India, in 
the field of Muslim ‘personal law’).  It was submitted , that Section 2 
aforesaid, commenced with a non obstante  clause.  It was pointed out, that 
the aforesaid non obstante  clause was referable only to amplify the 
exclusion of such customs and usages, as were contrar y to Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  It was submitted, that refer ence was pointedly 
made only to such customs and usages as were not in consonance with the 172 Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  It was asserted, that the mandate of 
Section 2 was aimed at making Muslim ‘personal law’ –  ‘Shariat’ as “the rule 
of decision”, even when customs and usages were to t he contrary.  It was 
sought to be explained, that the Shariat Act neither defin ed nor expounded, 
the parameters of the same, with reference to subjects to  which Sections 2 
and 3 were made applicable.  It was therefore submit ted, that the 
enactment under reference did not introduce Muslim ‘per sonal law’ – 
‘Shariat’, as the same was the law applicable to the M uslims even prior to 
the enactment of the said legislation.  In this behalf, it was pointed out, that 
in different parts of the country customs and usages wer e being applied 
even with reference to the Muslims overriding their ‘p ersonal law’.  In order 
to substantiate the above contention learned senior counse l made a pointed 
reference to the statement of objects and reasons of the  above enactment, 
which would reveal that Muslims of British India had p ersistently urged 
that customary law and usages should not take the place of Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  It was also pointed out, th at the statement of 
objects and reasons also highlight that his client, na mely, Jamiat-ul-Ulema-
i-Hind had supported the demand of the applicability  of the Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, for adjudication of dispu tes amonst Muslims, and 
had urged, that custom and usage to the contrary, should  not have an 
overriding effect.  It was pointed out, that this could b e done only because 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’ was in existence an d was inapplicable to 
the adjudication of disputes amongst Muslims, even prio r to the above 
enactment in 1937.  Understood in the aforesaid manner,  it was submitted, 173 that Muslim ‘personal law’ as a body of law, was only  perpetuated, by the 
Shariat Act.  It was submitted, that the Muslim ‘personal  law’ had not been 
subsumed by the statute nor had the 1937 Act codified the Muslim 
‘personal law’.  It was submitted, that the 1937 legisla tion was only 
statutorily declared that the Muslim ‘personal law’, as a set of rules, would 
govern the Muslims in India, and that, it would be the Muslim ‘personal law’ 
that would have an overriding effect over any custom or usage to the 
contrary.  It was therefore reiterated, that the legisla ture which enacted the 
Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937, neither modified nor 
amended even in a small measure, the Muslim ‘persona l law’ applicable to 
the Muslims in India, nor did the legislature while e nacting the above 
enactment, subsumed the Muslim ‘personal law’, and the refore, the 
character of the Muslim ‘personal law’ did not undergo  a change on account 
of the enactment of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Ap plication Act, 
1937.  According to learned senior counsel, the Musl im ‘personal law’ did 
not metamorphized into a statute, and as such, the rights  and duties of 
Muslims in India continued to be governed even after  the enactment of the 
Shariat Act, as before.  It was pointed out, that the S hariat Act did not 
substitute, nor did it provide for any different set of rights and obligations 
other than those which were recognized and prevalent a s Muslim ‘personal 
law’ – ‘Shariat’.  As such, it was contended, that it was  wholly unjustified to 
assume, that Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’ was giv en statutory effect, 
through the Shariat Act.  It was therefore submitted that a challenge to the 
validity of Section 2 of the above enactment, so as to assail the validity of 174 ‘talaq-e-biddat’ as being contrary to the fundamental rig hts contained in 
Part III of the Constitution, was an exercise in futilit y.  Insofar as the 
instant assertion is concerned, learned senior counsel  advanced two 
submissions – firstly, that Section 2 of the Muslim Pers onal Law (Shariat) 
Application Act, 1937 did not by itself bring about an y law providing for 
rights and obligations to be asserted and discharged by the Muslims as a 
community, for the simple reason, that it only reaff irmed the perpetuieties 
of the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, and as such , the rights and 
obligations of persons which were subjected to Musli m ‘personal law’ – 
‘Shariat’, continued as they existed prior to the enactm ent of the Shariat 
Act.  And secondly, the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Sh ariat’, was neither 
transformed nor metamorphized by the Shariat Act, in the nature of 
crystalised rules and regulations, and as such, even if Section 2 of the 
Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 wa s struck down, the 
same would automatically revive the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, in 
view of the mandate contained in Article 25 of the Cons titution.  
Accordingly, it was pointed out, that the parameters of c hallenge, as were 
applicable to assail a statutory enactment, would not be  applicable in the 
matter of assailing the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shar iat’.  It was also the 
contention of learned senior counsel, that under Article  25(1) of the 
Constitution the right  to freely profess, practice an d propagate religion, was 
a universal right, guaranteed to every person, to act in  affirmation of his 
own faith.  It was submitted, that the above ambit was the core of the 
secular nature of the Indian Constitution.  It was acco rdingly pointed out, 175 that the confines of the rights protected under Article 25 (1), could be 
assailed on limited grounds of public order, moralit y and health, and also if, 
the provisions of Part III – Fundamental Rights, of th e Constitution were 
breached. 
109. It was submitted, that a breach of the provisions c ontained in  Part 
III – Fundamental Rights under the Constitution, could only be invoked 
with reference to a State action, as only State action ha s to conform to 
Articles 14, 15 and 21.  It was therefore submitted, tha t a facial subjugation 
of the right under Article 25(1) to the other provison s of the Constitution 
would be inapplicable in the case of ‘personal law’,  that has no source to 
any statute, or State action.  It was submitted, that the Sh ariat Act  affirms 
the applicability of Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Sharia t’ and perpetuates it by 
virtue of Section 2 thereof.  And therefore, it would no t give the Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’ a statutory flavour. 
110. It was also submitted, that Sunnis were a religious  denomination 
within the meaning of Article 25 of the Constitution,  and therefore, were 
subject to public policy, morality and health.  Sunni Muslims, therefore had 
a right inter alia  to manage their own affairs in matters relating to rel igion.  
It was pointed out, that it could not be gainsaid, that mar riage and divorce 
were matters of religion.  Therefore, Sunnis as a re ligious denomination, 
were entitled to manage their own affairs in matters of marriage and 
divorce, which are in consonance with the Muslim ‘per sonal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  
It was therefore submitted, that the provisions relating to marriage and 
divorce, as were contained in the Muslim ‘personal la w’ – ‘Shariat’, were 176 entitled to be protected as a denominational right, unde r Article 25 of the 
Constitution. 
111. Mr. V. Shekhar, Mr. Somya Chakravarti, Senior A dvocates, Mr.Ajit 
Wagh, Ajmal Khan, Senior Advocate, Mr. V.K. Biju, M r. Banerjee, Mr. 
Ashwani Upadhyay, Mr.Vivek C. Solsha, Ms. Rukhsana,  Ms. Farah Faiz, 
Advocates also assisted the Court.  Their assistance to th e Court, was on 
issues canvassed by other learned counsel who had ap peared before them.  
The submissions advanced by them, have already been recorded above.  For 
reasons of brevity, it is not necessary for us to rec ord the same submission 
once again, in the names of learned counsel referre d to above.  All that 
needs to be mentioned is, that we have taken due notice o f the nuances 
pointed out, and their emphasis on different aspects o f the controversy. 
Part-9.  
Consideration of the rival contentions, and our conclus ions:  
112. During the course of our consideration, we will endeavour to 
examine a series of complicated issues. We will need  to determine, the legal 
sanctity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq.  This will  enable us to ascertain, 
whether the practice of talaq has a legislative sanction,  because it is the 
petitioner’s case, that it is so through express legislati on (-the Muslim 
Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937).  But the stance adopted on 
behalf of those contesting the petitioner’s claim is, tha t its stature is that of 
‘personal law’, and on that account, the practice of ‘ talaq-e-biddat’ has a 
constitutional protection. 177 113. Having concluded one way or the other, we will need to determine 
whether divorce by way of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple tala q, falls foul of Part III – 
Fundamental Rights of the Constitution (this determinatio n would be 
subject to, the acceptance of the petitioner’s contention, that the practice 
has statutory sanction).  However, if We conclude to the  contrary, namely, 
that the ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq, has the stature of ‘personal law’, We 
will have to determine the binding effect of the practi ce, and whether it can 
be interfered with on the judicial side by this Court.  The instant course 
would be necessary, in view of the mandate contained i n Article 25 of the 
Constitution, which has been relied upon by those who  are opposing the 
petitioner’s cause.   
114. Even if we agree with the proposition that ‘talaq -e-biddat’ – triple 
talaq constitutes the ‘personal law’ governing Muslims,  on the issue of 
divorce, this Court will still need to examine, whether  the practice of ‘talaq-
e-biddat’ – triple talaq, violates the acceptable norms o f “… public order, 
morality and health and to the other provisions …” of Part III of the 
Constitution (–for that, is the case set up by the petitio ner). Even if the 
conclusions after the debate travelling the course nar rated in the foregoing 
paragraph does not lead to any fruitful results for the petitioner’s cause, it 
is their case, that the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ bein g socially repulsive 
should be declared as being violative of  constitution al morality – a concept 
invoked by this Court, according to the petitioner, to i nterfere with on the 
ground that it would serve a cause in larger public i nterest. The petitioners’ 
cause, in the instant context is supported by the abrogatio n of the practice 178 of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, the world over in countries with si zeable Muslim 
populations including theocratic Islamic States. The fo llowing examination, 
shall traverse the course recorded herein above. 
I.   Does the judgment of the Privy Council in the Ras hid Ahmad case, 
upholding ‘talaq-e-biddat’, require a relook ? 
 
115. It would not be necessary for this debate – about  the validity of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’ under the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Sh ariat’, to be prolonged 
or complicated, if the decision rendered by the Privy Council, in the Rashid 
Ahmad case 1 is to be considered as the final word on its validi ty, as also, on 
the irrevocable nature of divorce, by way of ‘talaq-e- biddat’. The debate 
would end forthwith.  The aforesaid judgment was rend ered by applying the 
Muslim ‘personal law’.  In the above judgment, ‘talaq- e-biddat’ was held as 
valid and binding.  The pronouncement in the Rashid A hmad case 1 is of 
extreme significance, because Anisa Khatun – the ers twhile wife and her 
former husband Ghyas-ud-din had continued to cohabit and live together 
with her husband, for a period of fifteen years, af ter the pronouncement of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’.  During this post divorce cohabitation , five children were 
born to Anisa Khatun, through Ghiyas-ud-din.  And ye t, the Privy Council 
held, that the marital relationship between the parties ha d ceased forthwith, 
on the pronouncement of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq.   The Privy Council 
also held, that the five children born to Anisa Khatun,  could not be 
considered as the legitimate children of Ghyas-ud-din,  and his erstwhile 
wife.  The children born to Anisa Khatun after the par ties stood divorced, 
were therefore held as disentitled to inherit the propert y of Ghyas-ud-din. 
The judgment in the Rashid Ahmad case 1 was rendered in 1932.  The 179 asserted statutory status of Muslim ‘personal law’ (as h as been canvassed 
by the petitioners), emerged from the enactment of the Mus lim Personal Law 
(Shariat) Application Act, 1937.  The ‘Shariat’ Act ex pressly provided, that 
the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, would constitu te “the rule of decision”, 
in causes where the parties were Muslim.  It is not in dispute, that besides 
other subjects, consequent upon the enactment of the Shari at Act, 
dissolution of marriage amongst Muslims, by way of ‘talaq’, would also have 
to be in consonance with the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  As noticed 
herein above, ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is one of the forms of dissolution of marriage 
by ‘talaq’, amongst Muslims.  According to the petitione rs case, the issue 
needed a fresh look, of the conferment of statutoty s tatus to Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  It was submitted, that afte r having acquired 
statutory status, the questions and subjects (including ‘ talaq-e-biddat’), 
would have to be in conformity (-and not in conflict),  with the provisions of 
Part III – Fundamental Rights, of the Constitution.  Nee dless to mention, 
that all these are important legal questions, requiring examination. 
116. In our considered view, the matter would most cer tainly also require 
a fresh look, because various High Courts, having ex amined the practice of 
divorce amongst Muslims, by way of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, h ave arrived at the 
conclusion, that the judgment in the Rashid Ahmad case 1 was rendered on 
an incorrect understanding, of the Muslim ‘personal la w’ – ‘Shariat’.  
117. If the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937, had 
incorporated the manner in which questions regarding i ntestate succession, 
special property of females including personal prop erty inherited or 180 obtained under contract or gift or matters such as marria ge, dissolution of 
marriage, including talaq, ila, jihar, lian, khula a nd mubaraat, 
maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trusts and tr ust properties, and 
wakfs (-as in Section 2 thereof), had to be dealt with, as per Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’ according to the petitioner s, it would be quite a 
different matter.  All the same, the Shariat Act did not describe how the 
above questions and subjects had to be dealt with.  And  therefore, for 
settlement of disputes amongst Muslims, it would need to b e first 
determined, what the Muslim ‘personal law’, with refe rence to the 
disputation, was.  Whatever it was, would in terms of S ection 2 of the 1937 
Act, constitute “the rule of decision”.  After the Priv y Council had rendered 
the judgment in the Rashid Ahmad case 1, and well after the asserted 
statutory status came to be conferred on Muslim ‘person al law’ – ‘Shariat’, 
the issue came up for consideration before the Kerala High Court in A. 
Yusuf Rawther v. Sowramma 35 , wherein, the High Court examined the 
above decision of the Privy Council in the Rashid Ahm ad case 1, and 
expressed, that the views of the British Courts on Mus lim ‘personal law’, 
were based on an incorrect understanding of ‘Shariat’ .  In the above 
judgment, a learned Single Judge (Justice V.R. Krish na Iyer, as he then 
was) of the Kerala High Court, recorded the following  observations: 
“7. There has been considerable argument at the bar – and precedents 
have been piled up by each side – as to the meaning to be given to the 
expression ‘failed to provide for her maintenance’ a nd about the grounds 
recognised as valid for dissolution under Muslim law .  Since infallibility 
is not an attribute of the judiciary, the view has been  ventured by 
Muslim jurists that the Indo-Anglian judicial expositio n of the Islamic 
                                                 
35  AIR 1971 Ker 261 181 law of divorce has not exactly been just to the Holy Pr ophet or the Holy 
Book.   Marginal distortions are inevitable when the Judicial  Committee 
in Downing Street has to interpret Manu and Muhammad o f India and 
Arabia.  The soul of a culture – law is largely the f ormalized and 
enforceable expression of a community’s cultural no rms – cannot be fully 
understood by alien minds.  The view that the Muslim h usband enjoys 
an arbitrary, unilateral power to inflict instant divorc e does not accord 
with Islamic injunctions ….   It is a popular fallacy that a Muslim male 
enjoys, under the Quaranic law, unbridled authority to  liquidate the 
marriage.   “The whole Quoran expressly forbids a man to seek pretexts 
for divorcing his wife, so long as she remains faith ful and obedient to 
him, “if they (namely, women) obey you, then do not s eek a way against 
them”.”  (Quaran IV:34).  The Islamic “law gives to t he man primarily the 
faculty of dissolving the marriage, if the wife, by her indocility or her bad 
character, renders the married life unhappy; but in the  absence of 
serious reasons, no man can justify a divorce, eithe r in the eye of religion 
or the law.  If he abandons his wife or puts her awa y in simple caprice, 
he draws upon himself the divine anger, for the curse  of God, said the 
Prophet, rests on him who repudiates his wife caprici ously.”   As the 
learned author, Ahmad A. Galwash notices, the pagan A rab, before the 
time of the Prophet, was absolutely free to repudiate his  wife whenever it 
suited his whim, but when the Prophet came He declared divorce to he 
“the most disliked of lawful things in the sight of God .  He was indeed 
never tired of expressing his abhorrence of divorce.   Once he said: ‘God 
created not anything on the face of the earth which He  loveth more than 
the act of manumission.  (of slaves) nor did He creat e anything on the 
face of the earth which he detesteth more than the act of  divorce”.  
Commentators on the Quoran have rightly observed – and this tallies 
with the law now administered in some Mulsim countrie s like Iraq – that 
the husband must satisfy the court about the reasons for  divorce.  
However, Muslim law, as applied in India, has taken a course contrary to 
the spirit of what the Prophet or the Holy Quoran laid down and the 
same misconception vitiates the law dealing with the wi fe’s right to 
divorce.”   
 
118. Without pointedly examining the issue of the validi ty of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’, under the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’,  this Court in Fuzlunbi 
v. K. Khader Vali36 , recorded the following observations: 
“20. Before we bid farewell to Fazlunbi it is necessa ry to mention that 
Chief Justice Baharul Islam, in an elaborate judgmen t replete with 
quotes from the Holy Quoran, has exposed the error of early English 
authors and judges who dealt with talaq in Muslim Law as good even if 
pronounced at whim or in tantrum, and argued against the  diehard view 
                                                 
36  (1980) 4 SCC 125 182 of Batchelor J. ILR 30 Bom 539 that this view ‘is goo d in law, though bad 
in theology’ .  Maybe, when the point directly arises, the question will 
have to be considered by this court, but enough unto the  day the evil 
thereof and we do not express our opinion on this ques tion as it does not 
call for a decision in the present case .” 
 
The above observations lead to the inference, that the pr oposition of law 
pronounced by the Privy Council in the Rashid Ahmad c ase 1, needed a 
relook.   
119. It would be relevant to mention, that in the interr egnum, the 
validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was considered by a lear ned Single Judge (Justice 
Baharul Islam, as he then was) of the Gauhati High C ourt, in the Jiauddin 
Ahmed case 2, wherein, the High Court took a view different from th e one 
recorded by the Privy Council (-in the Rashid Ahmad c ase 1).  In doing so, it 
relied on ‘hadiths’, ‘ijma’ and ‘qiyas’.  The issue  was again examined, by a 
Division Bench of the Gauhati High Court, in the Mst. Rukia Khatun case 3.  
Yet again, the High Court (speaking through, Chief Jus tice Baharul Islam, 
as he then was), did not concur with the view propounde d by the Privy 
Council.  The matter was also examined by a Single Judge (Justice Badar 
Durrez Ahmed, as he then was) of the Delhi High Court in the Masroor 
Ahmed case 4.  Herein again, by placing reliance on relevant ‘h adiths’, the 
Delhi High Court came to the conclusion, that the legal p osition expressed 
by the Privy Council on ‘talaq-e-biddat’, was not in co nsonance with the 
Muslim ‘personal law’.  The Kerala High Court, in the  Nazeer case 5 
(authored by, Justice A. Muhamed Mustaque) highlighted  the woeful 
condition of Muslim wives, because of the practice of  ‘talaq-e-biddat’, and 
recorded its views on the matter. 183 120. In view of the position expressed hereinabove, w e are of the 
considered view, that the opinion expressed by the Priv y Council with 
reference to ‘talaq-e-biddat’, in the Rashid Ahmad case1, holding that ‘talaq-
e-biddat’ results in finally and irrevocably severing  the matrimonial tie 
between spouses, the very moment it is pronounced, ne eds to be examined 
afresh.  More particularly, because the validity of the same as an approved 
concept, of Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, was n ot evaluated at that 
juncture (-as it indeed could not have been, as the le gislation was not 
available, when the Privy Council had rendered its ju dgment), in the 
backdrop of the Shariat Act,  and also, the provisions of the Constitution of 
India. 
II.  Has ‘talaq-e-biddat’, which is concededly sinful , sanction of law ?  
121. The petitioners, and others who support the petitone r’s cause, have 
vehemently contended, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’, does not have  its source of 
origin from the Quran. The submission does not need a  serious 
examination, because even ‘talaq-e-ahsan’ and ‘talaq-e -hasan’ which the 
petitioners acknowledge as – ‘the most proper’, and – ‘ the proper’ forms of 
divorce respectively, also do not find mention in the Q uran.  Despite the 
absence of any reference to ‘talaq-e-ahsan’ and ‘talaq -e-hasan’ in the 
Quran, none of the petitioners has raised any challeng e thereto, on this 
score.  A challenge to ‘talaq-e-biddat’ obviously cann ot be raised on this 
ground. We are satisfied, that the different approved pr actices of talaq 
among Muslims, have their origin in ‘hadiths’ and oth er sources of Muslim 
jurisprudence.  And therefore, merely because it is n ot expressly provided 184 for or approved by the Quran, cannot be a valid jus tification for setting 
aside the practice. 
122. The petitioners actually call for a simple and su mmary disposal of 
the controversy, by requiring us to hold, that whatever is irregular and 
sinful, cannot have the sanction of law.  The above pr ayer is supported by 
contending, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is proclaimed as bad  in theology.  It was 
submitted, that this practice is clearly patriarchal, and therefore, cannot be 
sustained in today’s world of gender equality.  In or der to persuade this 
Court, to accept the petitioners’ prayer – to declare the p ractice of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ as unacceptable in law, the Court’s attention was invited to the fact, 
that the present controversy needed a similar intervention , as had been 
adopted for doing away with similar patriarchal, irre gular and sinful 
practices amongst Hindus.  In this behalf, reference  was made to the 
practices of ‘Sati’, ‘Devadasi’ and ‘Polygamy’. 
123(i).  We may only highlight, that ‘Sati’ was common ly described as – 
widow burning. The practice required a widow to immol ate herself, on her 
husband’s pyre (or alternatively, to commit suicide sh ortly after her 
husband’s death).  ‘Sati’ just like ‘talaq-e-biddat’, ha d been in vogue since 
time immemorial.  It is believed, that the practice of ‘S ati’ relates back to the 
1st century B.C..  On the Indian sub-continent, it is s tated to have gained 
popularity from the 10 th  century A.D.  The submission was, that just as 
‘Sati’ had been declared as unacceptable, the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
should likewise be declared as unacceptable in law. 185 (ii)  ‘Devadasi’ translated literally means, a girl dedicated to the worship 
and service of a diety or temple.  The surrender and  service of the 
‘Devadasi’, in terms of the practice, was for life.  This practice had also been 
in vogue since time immorial, even though originally  ‘Devadasis’ had a high 
status in society, because the Rulers/Kings of the time,  were patrons of 
temples.  During British rule in India, the Rulers ba cking and support to 
temples, waned off.  It is believed, that after funds from the Rulers stopped,  
to sustain themselves ‘Devadasis’ used dancing and sin ging as a means of 
livelihood.  They also commenced to indulge in prosti tution.  The life of the 
‘Devadasi’, thereupon came into disrepute, and resulte d in a life of 
destitution.  The practice had another malady, tradition forbade a ‘Devadasi’ 
from marrying.   
(iii)  So far as ‘polygamy’ is concerned, we are of  the view that polygamy 
is well understood, and needs no elaboration. 
124. We are of the view, that the practices referred to b y the petitioners, 
to support their claim, need a further examination, to u nderstand how the 
practices were discontinued.  We shall now record deta ils, of how these 
practices, were abolished:   
(i) Insofar as the practice of ‘Sati’ is concerned, its  practice reached 
alarming proportion between 1815-1818, it is estimate d that the incidence 
of ‘Sati’ doubled during this period.  A campaign to  abolish ‘Sati’ was 
initiated by Christian missionaries (- like, William Carey), and by Hindu 
Brahmins (-like, Ram Mohan Roy).  The provincial Go vernment of Bengal 
banned ‘Sati’ in 1829, by way of legislation.  This w as then followed by 186 similar laws by princely States in India.  After the pr actice was barred by 
law, the Indian Sati Prevention Act, 1988 was enacted, w hich crimnalised 
any type of aiding, abetting or glorifying the practice  of ‘Sati’.   
(ii) Insofar as the practice of ‘Devadasi’ is concern ed, soon after the end 
of British rule, independent India passed the Madras D evadasi’s (Prevention 
of Dedication) Act (-also called the Tamil Nadu Devad asis (Prevention of 
Dedication Act) on 09.10.1947.  The enactment made pros titution illegal.  
The other legislations enacted on the same issue, incl uded the 1934 
Bombay Devadasi Protection Act, the 1957 Bombay Protecti on (Extension) 
Act, and the Andhra Pradesh Devadasi (Prohibition of D edication) Act of 
1988.  It is therefore apparent, that the instant practic e was done away 
with, through legislation. 
(iii) The last of the sinful practices brought to our n otice was ‘polygamy’.  
Polygamy was permitted amongst Hindus.  In 1860, the In dian Penal Code 
made ‘polygamy’ a criminal offence.  The Hindu Mari age Act was passed in 
1955.  Section 5 thereof provides, the conditions for a valid Hindu marriage.  
One of the conditions postulated therein was, that neither  of the parties to 
the matrimonial alliance should have a living spouse,  at the time of the 
marriage.  It is therefore apparent, that the practice o f polygamy was not 
only done away with amongst Hindus, but the same was also made 
punishable as a criminal offence.  This also happen ed by legislation. 
125. The factual and the legal position noticed in the foregoing paragraph 
clearly brings out, that the practices of ‘Sati’, ‘Deva dasi’ and ‘polygamy’ were 
abhorrent, and could well be described as sinful.  They were clearly 187 undesirable and surely bad in theology.  It is howev er important to notice, 
that neither of those practices came to be challenged bef ore any court of 
law.  Each of the practices to which our pointed attentio n was drawn, came 
to be discontinued and invalidated by way of legislativ e enactments.  The 
instances cited on behalf of the petitioners cannot theref ore be of much 
avail, with reference to the matter in hand, wherein, th e prayer is for 
judicial intervention.  
126. We would now venture to attempt an answer to the sim ple prayer 
made on behalf of the petitioners, for a summary dispo sal of the petitioner’s 
cause, namely, for declaring the practice of ‘talaq-e -biddat’, as unacceptable 
in law.  In support of the instant prayer, it was subm itted, that it could not 
be imagined, that any religious practice, which was c onsidered as a sin, by 
the believers of that very faith, could be considered a s enforceable in law.  It 
was asserted, that what was sinful could not be religi ous.  It was also 
contended, that merely because a sinful practice had pr evailed over a long 
duration of time, it could best be considered as a form  of custom or usage, 
and not a matter of any binding faith. (This submissio n, is being dealt with 
in part IV, immediately hereinafter).  It was submitted , that no court should 
find any difficulty, in declaring a custom or usage – which is sinful, as 
unacceptable in law. It was also the pointed assertion o n behalf of the 
petitioners, that what was sacrilegious could not ever be  a part of Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’. The manner in which one  learned counsel 
expressed the proposition, during the course of hearin g, was very 
interesting.  We may therefore record the submission ex actly in the manner 188 it was projected.  Learned counsel for evoking and a rousing the Bench’s 
conscience submitted, “if something is sinful or abh orrent in the eyes of 
God, can any law by man validate it”.  It seems to us, that the suggestion 
was, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ did not flow out of any religi ous foundation, and 
therefore, the practice need not be considered as relig ious at all.  One of the 
non-professional individuals assisting this Court on behalf of the 
petitioners’, went to the extent of stating, that the fear of  the fact, that the 
wife could be thrown out of the matrimonial house, at a ny time, was like a 
sword hanging over the matrimonial alliance, during the entire duration of 
the marriage.  It was submitted, that the fear of ‘talaq-e- biddat’, was a 
matter of continuous mental torture, for the female spous e.  We were told, 
that the extent of the practice being abhorrent, can be v isualized from the 
aforesaid, position.  It was submitted, that the practice was extremely self-
effacing, and continued to be a cause of insecurity, for the entire duration of 
the matrimonial life.  It was pointed out, that this practi ce violated the 
pious and noble prescripts of the Quran.  It was high lighted, that even 
those who had appeared on behalf of the respondents, h ad acknowledged, 
that the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was described as i rregular and sinful, 
even amongst Muslims.  It was accordingly asserted, th at it was accepted by 
one and all, that the practice was bad in theology. It w as also 
acknowledged, that it had no place in modern day soci ety.  Learned counsel  
therefore suggested, that triple talaq should be simply d eclared as 
unacceptable in law, and should be finally done away  with. 189 127. A simple issue, would obviously have a simple answer.  Irespective 
of what has been stated by the learned counsel for the r ival parties, there 
can be no dispute on two issues.  Firstly, that the pra ctice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
has been in vogue since the period of Umar, which is  roughly more than 
1400 years ago.  Secondly, that each one of learned c ounsel, irrespective of 
who they represented, (-the petitioners or the respond ents), acknowledged 
in one voice, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ though bad in theol ogy, was considered as 
“good” in law.  All learned counsel representing the petitioners were also 
unequivocal, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was accepted as a “ valid” practice in law.  
That being so, it is not possible for us to hold, the p ractice to be invalid in 
law, merely at the asking of the petitioners, just becaus e it is considered 
bad in theology. 
III. Is the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, approved/disa pproved by “hadiths ”?  
 
128. At the beginning of our consideration, we have ar rived at the 
conclusion, that the judgment rendered by the Privy Coun cil in the Rashid 
Ahmad case 1, needs a reconsideration, in view of the pronounceme nts of 
various High Courts including a Single Judge of the G auhati High Court in 
the Jiauddin Ahmed case 2, a Division Bench of the same High Court – the 
Gauhati High Court in the Rukia Khatun case 3,  by a Single Judge of the 
Delhi High Court in the Masroor Ahmed case 4, and finally, on account of 
the decision of a Single Judge of the Kerala High Cou rt in the Nazeer case 5.   
129. Even though inconsequential, and the same can nev er – never be 
treated as a relevant consideration, it needs to be hig hlighted, that each one 
of the Judges who authored the judgments rendered by the  High Courts 190 referred to above, professed the Muslim religion.  Th ey were Sunni Muslims, 
belonging to the Hanafi school.  The understanding by  them, of their 
religion, cannot therefore be considered as an outsid er’s view.  In the four 
judgments referred to above, the High Courts relied on  ‘hadiths’ to support 
and supplement the eventual conclusion drawn.  There i s certainly no room 
for any doubt, that if ‘hadiths’ relied upon by the High  Courts in their 
respective judgments, validly affirmed the position exp ressed with reference 
to ‘talaq-e-biddat’, there would be no occasion for us to record a view to the 
contrary.  It is in the aforestated background, that we p roceed to examine 
the ‘hadiths’ relied upon by learned counsel appearin g for the rival parties, 
to support their individual claims. 
130. A number of learned counsel who had appeared i n support of the 
petitioners’ claim, that the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was un-Islamic, and 
that this Court needed to pronounce it as such, invited our attention to a 
set of ‘hadiths’, to substantiate their position.  The as sertions made on 
behalf of the petitioners were opposed, by placing rel iance on a different set 
of ‘hadiths’.  Based thereon, we will endeavour to re cord a firm conclusion, 
whether ‘talaq-e-biddat’, was or was not, recognized a nd supported by 
‘hadiths’. 
131. First of all, we may refer to the submissions adv anced by Mr. Amit 
Singh Chadha, Senior Advocate, who had painstakingly referred to the 
‘hadiths’ in the four judgments of the High Courts (-f or details, refer to Part-
6 – Judicial pronouncements, on the subject of ‘talaq-e -biddat’).  Insofar as 
the Jiauddin Ahmed case 2 is concerned, details of the entire consideration 191 have been narrated in paragraph 31 hereinabove.  Li kewise, the 
consideration with reference to the Rukia Khatun case 3 has been recorded 
in paragraph 32.  The judgment in the Masroor Ahmed case 4 has been dealt 
with in paragraph 33.  And finally, the Nazeer case5 has been deciphered, 
by incorporating the challenge, the consideration and the conclusion in 
paragraph 34 hereinabove.  For reasons of brevity, it is not necessary to 
record all the above ‘hadiths’ for the second time.  R eferefence may therefore 
be made to the paragraphs referred to above, as the fir st basis expressed on 
behalf of the petitioners, to lay the foundation of their claim, that the 
practice, of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ cannot be accepted as a m atter of ‘personal law’ 
amongst Muslims, including Sunni Muslims belonging t o the Hanafi school.  
In fact, learned senior counsel, asserted, that the pos ition expressed by the 
High Courts, had been approved by this Court in the Sh amim Ara case 12 . 
132. Mr. Anand Grover, Senior Advocate, reiterated a nd reaffirmed the 
position expressed in the four judgments (two of the G auhati High Court, 
one of the Delhi High Court, and the last one of the Ke rala High Court) to 
emphasize his submissions, as a complete justificati on for accepting the 
claims of the petitioners.  Interestingly, learned seni or counsel made a 
frontal attack to the ‘hadiths’ relied upon by the AIMPLB .  To repudiate the 
veracity of the ‘hadiths’ relied upon by the responde nts, it was pointed out, 
that it was by now settled, that there were various degrees  of reliability 
and/or authenticity of different ‘hadiths’.  Referring  to the Principles of 
Mohomedan Law by Sir Dinshaw Fardunji Mulla (LexisN exis, Butterworths 
Wadhwa, Nagpur, 20 th  edition), it was asserted, that the ‘hadiths’ relied 192 upon by the AIMPLB (to which a reference will be mad e separately), were far 
– far removed from the time of the Prophet Mohammad.  I t was explained, 
that ‘hadiths’ recorded later in point of time, were les s credible and 
authentic,  as with the passage of time, distortions wer e likely to set in, 
making them unreliable.  It was asserted, that ‘hadiths’  relied upon in the 
four judgments rendered by the High Courts, were the tru ly reliable 
‘hadiths’, as they did not suffer from the infirmity e xpressed above.  In 
addition to the above, learned senior counsel drew o ur attention, to Sunan 
Bayhaqi 7/547 referred to on behalf of the AIMPLB, so  as to point out, that 
the same was far removed from the time of Prophet Moham mad.  As against 
the above, it was submitted, that the ‘hadiths’ of Bhukahri  (published by 
Darussalam, Saudi Arabia), also relied upon by the A IMPLB, were obvious 
examples of a clear distortion.  Moreover, it was sub mitted, that the 
‘hadiths’, relied upon by the AIMPLB were not found in the Al Bukhari 
Hadiths. It was therefore submitted, that reliance on the  ‘hadiths’ other 
than those noticed in the individual judgments referred to hereinabove, 
would be unsafe (-for details, refer to paragraph 42) .   
133. Learned senior counsel also asserted, that as a historical fact Shia 
Muslims believe, that during the Prophet’s time, and tha t of the First Caliph 
– Abu Baqhr, and the Second Caliph – Umar, pronounce ments of talaq by 
three consecutive utterances were treated as one.  (Refe rence in this behalf 
was made to “Sahih Muslim” compiled by Al-Hafiz Zaki uddin Abdul-Azim 
Al-Mundhiri, and published by Darussalam).   Learne d senior counsel also 
placed reliance on “The lawful and the prohibited in Islam” by Al-Halal Wal 193 Haram Fil Islam (edition – August 2009).  It was pointe d out, that the 
instant transcript was of Egyptian origin, and furthe r emphasized, that the 
same therefore needed to be accepted as genuine and a pplicable to the 
dispute, because Egypt was primarily dominated by Sunn i Muslims 
belonging to the Hanafi school.  In the above publi cation, it was submitted, 
that the practice of instant triple talaq was described a s sinful. Reference 
was then made to “Woman in Islamic Shariah” by Maula na Wahiduddin 
Khan (published by Goodword Books, reprinted in 201 4), wherein, 
irrespective of the number of times the word ‘talaq’ was  pronounced (if 
pronounced at the same time, and on the same occasion ), was treated as a 
singular pronouncement of talaq, in terms of the ‘hadi th’ of Imam Abu 
Dawud in Fath al-bari 9/27.   It was submitted, that the aforesaid ‘hadith’ 
had rightfully been taken into consideration by the Delh i High Court in the 
Masroor Ahmed case 4.  In addition to the above, reference was made to 
“Marriage and family life in Islam” by Prof. (Dr.) A. Rahman (Adam 
Publishers and Distributors, New Delhi, 2013 edition),  wherein by placing 
reliance on a Hanafi Muslim scholar, it was opined th at triple talaq was not 
in consonance with the verses of the Quran.  Relianc e was also placed on 
“Imam Abu Hanifa – Life and Work” by Allamah Shibli nu’mani’s of 
Azamgarh, who founded the Shibli College in the 19 th  century.  Relying 
upon a prominent Hanafi Muslim scholar, it was affirm ed, that Abu Hanifa 
himself had declared, that it was forbidden to give thr ee divorces at the 
same time, and whoever did so was a sinner (-for deta ils, refer to paragraph 
42).  Based on the aforestated text available in the fo rm of ‘hadiths’, it was 194 submitted, that the position adopted by the AIMPLB in its pl eadings, was 
clearly unacceptable, and need to be rejected.  And t hat, the coclusions 
drawn by the four High Courts referred to above, need to be declared as a 
valid determination on the subject of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, in exercise of this 
Court’s power under Article 141 of the Constitution. 
134.  Mr. Kapil Sibal, appearing on behalf of the A IMPLB, contested the 
submissions advanced on behalf of the petitioners.  In  the first instance, 
learned senior counsel placed reliance on verses fr om the Quran.  Reference 
was made to Quran, Al-Hashr 59:71; Quran, Al-Anfal 8 :20; Quran, Al-Nisa 
4:64; Quran, Al-Anfal 8:13; Quran, Al-Ahzab 33:36; and Quran, Al-Nisa 
4:115 (-for details, refer to paragraph 86 above).  P ointedly on the subject of 
triple talaq, and in order to demonstrate, that the same i s not in 
consonance with the Quranic verses, the Court’s attention  was drawn to 
Quran, Al-Baqarah 2:229; Quran, Al-Baqarah 2:229 an d 230; Quran, Al-
Baqarah 2:232; and Quran, Al-Talaq 65:1 (-for detail s, refer to paragraph 86 
above).  Besides the aforesaid, learned senior couns el invited this Court’s 
attention to the statements attributed to the Prophet Mohammad , with 
reference to talaq.  On this account, the Court’s attentio n was drawn to 
Daraqutni, Kitab Al-Talaq wa Al-Khula wa Al-Aiyla, 5/ 23, Hadith number: 
3992; Daraqutni, 5/81; Kitab al-Talaq wa Al-Khulawa aI-Aiyala, Hadith 
number: 4020; Sunan Bayhaqi, 7/547, Hadith number: 1 4955; AI-Sunan 
AI-Kubra Iil Bayhaqi, Hadith number: 14492; and Sah i al-Bukhari Kitab al-
Talaq, Hadith number: 5259 (-for details, refer to par agraph 86 above).  
Representing the AIMPLB, learned senior counsel, also  highlighted ‘hadiths’ 195 on the subject of ‘talaq’ and drew our attention to Sun an Abu Dawud, Bad 
Karahiya al-Talaq, Hadith no: 2178; Musannaf ibn Ab i Shaybah, Bab man 
kara an yatliq aI rajal imratahuu thalatha fi maqad w ahadi wa ajaza 
dhalika alayhi,  Hadith number: 18089; (Musannaf ibn  Abi Shayba, Kitab 
al-Talaq, bab fi al rajal yatlaqu imratahuu miata aw alfa,  Hadith number: 
18098; Musannaf Abd al-Razzaq, Kitab al-talaq, Hadith number 11340; 
Musannaf ibn Abi Shayba, Kitab aI-Talaq, Hadith no: 18091; Musannaf Ibn 
Abi Shayba, Hadith no: 18087; Al-Muhadhdhab, 4/305; and Bukhari, 
3/402 (-for details, refer to paragraph 87 above). 
135. Having dealt with the position expounded in the Q uran and 
‘hadiths’ as has been noticed above, learned senior counsel attempted to 
repudiate the veracity of the ‘hadiths’ relied upon, in  all the four judgments 
rendered by the High Courts.  In this behalf learned s enior counsel provided 
the following complilation for this Court’s considerati on: 
   1. The Jiauddin Ahmed case 2 
Sl. 
No. Reference Comments 
(i) Maulana Mohammad Ali 
(referred to  at paras 7, 11, 
12 and 13 of the judgment) He is a Qadiyani.  Mirza 
Ghulam Ahmed (founder of the 
Qadiani School) declared 
himself to be the Prophet after 
Prophet Mohammed and it is for 
this reason that all Muslims do 
not consider the Qadiyani sect 
to be a part of the Islamic 
community. 
 
2. The Rukia Khatun case 3 
Sl. 
No.  Reference Comments 
(i)  Authorities in this judgment are 
identical to the above mentioned 
judgment of Jiauddin Ahmed v. 
Anwara Begum. 196  
3. The Masroor Ahmed case 4 
Sl. 
No.  Reference Comments 
(i) Mulla (Referred at the 
footnote at page 153 of the 
judgment) Approves the proposition that 
triple talaq is sinful, yet effective 
as an irrevocable divorce. 
 
4. The Nazeer case 5. 
Sl. No. Reference Comments 
(i) Basheer Ahmad Mohyidin 
(Referred at paras 1 and 6 
of the judgment) He wrote a commentary on the 
Quran entitled as Quran: The 
Living Truth, however the extract 
relied upon in the decision does 
not discuss triple talaq. 
(ii) Ibn Kathir (Referred in 
paras 1 and 8 of the 
judgment) He wrote a commentary on the 
Quran entitled as Tafsir Ibn 
Kathir.  He takes the view, that 
three pronouncements at the 
same time were unlawful.  It is 
submitted that he belonged to 
the Ahl-e-Hadith/Salafi school, 
which school does not recognize 
triple talaq. 
(iii) Dr. Tahir Mahmood 
(Referred in para 6 of the 
judgment) He was a Professor of Law, Delhi 
University. 
He wrote a book entitled “Muslim 
Law in India and Abroad” and 
other books.  Referred to other 
Islamic scholars to state, that it 
is a misconception that three 
talaqs have to be pronounced in 
three consecutive months, it is 
not a general rule as the three 
pronouncements have to be 
made when the wife is not in her 
menses, which would obviously 
require about three months. 
It is submitted, that the said 
extract is irrelevant and out of 
context as it does not specifically 
deal with validity of triple talaq. 
(iv) Sheikh Yusuf Al-Qaradawi 
(Referred in para 8 of the 
judgment) He regarded triple talaq as 
against God’s law.  It is 
submitted that he was a follower 
of the Ahl-e-Hadith School. 197 (v) Mahmoud Rida Murad 
(Referred in para 8 of the 
judgment) He authored the book entitled as 
Islamic Digest of Aqeedah and 
Fiqh.  He took the view that triple 
talaq does not conform to the 
teachings of the Prophet.  He is a 
follower of the Ahl-e-Hadith 
school. 
(vi)  Sayyid Abdul Ala Maududi 
(Referred in para 11 of the 
judgment) He is a scholar of the Hanafi 
School.  Though the passages 
extracted in the judgment 
indicate that he was of the view 
that three pronouncements can 
be treated as one depending on 
the intention.  However, 
subsequently he has changed his 
own view and has opined that 
triple talaq is final and 
irrevocable. 
 
(vii) Dr. Abu Ameenah Bilal 
Philips (Referred in para 19 
of the judgment) He authored the book ‘Evolution 
of Fiqh’.  He states that Caliph 
Umar introduced triple talaq in 
order to discourage abuse of 
divorce.  He is a follower of the 
Ahl-e Hadith school. 
(viii) Mohammed Hashim 
Kamali (Referred in para 23 
of the judgment) He was of the view that Caliph 
Umar introduced triple talaq in 
order to discourage abuse of 
divorce.  He is a professor of law. 
 
It was the submitted on behalf of the AIMPLB, that the v iews of persons 
who are not Sunnis, and those who did not belong to the Hanafi school, 
could not have been validly relied upon.  It was sub mitted, that reliance on 
Maulana Muhammad Ali was improper because he was a Qadiyani, and 
that Muslims do not consider the Qadiyani sect to be a pa rt of the Islamic 
community.  Likewise, it was submitted, that reference to  Basheer Ahmad 
Mohyidin was misplaced, as the commentary authored by him, did not deal 
with the concept of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  Reference to Tafs ir Ibn Kathir was 
stated to be improper, as he belonged to the Ahl-e-Hadit h/Salafi school, 198 which school does not accept triple talaq.  It was subm itted, that Dr. Tahir 
Mahmood was a Professor of Law at the Delhi Universit y, and his views 
must be treated as personal to him, and could not be elevated to the 
position of ‘hadiths’.  It was pointed out, that Sheikh Yu suf al-Qaradawi, 
was a follower of Ahl-e-Hadith school, and therefor e, his views could not be 
taken into consideration.  So also, it was submitted, th at Mahmoud Rida 
Murad was a follower of Ahl-e-Hadith/Salafi school.   Reference to Sayyid 
Abdul Ala Maududi, it was pointed out, was improperly relied upon, 
because the view expressed by the above scholar was that “three 
pronouncements of talaq could be treated as one, depen ding on the 
‘intention’ of the husband”.  This position, according  to learned senior 
counsel, does not support the position propounded on b ehalf of the 
petitioners, because if the ‘intention’ was to make three  pronouncements, it 
would constitute a valid ‘talaq’.  With reference to Dr . Abu Ameenah Bilal 
Philips, it was submitted, that he was also a follower  of the Ahl-e-
Hadith/Salafi school.  Last of all, with reference to Mohammed Hashim 
Kamali, it was pointed out, that he was merely a Profess or of Law, and the 
views expressed by him should be considered as his personal views.  It was 
accordingly asserted, that supplanting the views of othe r schools of Sunni 
Muslims, with reference to the practice of ‘talaq-e-bid dat’ by the proponents 
of the Hanafi school, and even with the beliefs of Sh ia Muslims, was a clear 
breach of a rightful understanding of the school, an d the practice in 
question. 199 136. Based on the submissions advanced on behalf of  the AIMPLB, as 
have been noticed hereinabove, it was sought to be emph asized, that such 
complicated issues relating to norms applicable to a r eligious sect, could 
only be determined by the community itself.  Learned counsel cautioned, 
this Court from entering into the thicket of the instant determination, as 
this Court did not have the expertise to deal with the issu e.   
137. Having given our thoughtful consideration, and ha ving examined 
the rival ‘hadiths’ relied upon by  learned counsel f or the parties, we have 
no other option, but to accept the contention of learned senior counsel 
appearing on behalf of the AIMPLB, and to accept his counsel, not to enter 
into the thicket of determining (on the basis of the ‘h adiths’ relied upon) 
whether or not ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq, constitute d a valid practice 
under the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  In fac t, even Mr. Salman 
Khurshid appearing on behalf of the petitioners (seeki ng the repudiation of 
the practice of the ‘talaq-e-biddat’) had pointed out, tha t it was not the role 
of a court to interprete nuances of Muslim ‘personal l aw’ – ‘Shariat’.  It was 
pointed out, that under the Muslim ‘personal law’, the religious head – the 
Imam would be called upon to decipher the teachings expressed in the 
Quran and the ‘hadiths’, in order to resolve a confli ct between the parties.  
It was submitted, that the Imam alone, had the authority to  resolve a 
religious conflict, amongst Muslims.  It was submitted , that the Imam 
would do so, not on the basis of his own views, but by relying on the verses 
from the Quran, and the ‘hadiths’, and based on other j urisprudential tools 
available, and thereupon he would render the correct i nterpretation.  Mr. 200 Salman Khurshid, learned Senior Advocate also caution ed this Court, that 
it was not its role to determine the true intricacies of faith.   
138. All the submissions noted above, at the behest of the learned 
counsel representing the AIMPLB would be inconsequenti al, if the judgment 
rendered by this Court in the Shamim Ara case 12 , can be accepted as 
declaring the legal position in respect of ‘talaq-e-bi ddat’.  Having given a 
thoughtful consideration to the contents of the above jud gment, it needs to 
be recorded, that this Court in the Shamim Ara case 12  did not debate the 
issue of validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  No submission s have been noticed for or 
against, the proposition. Observations recorded on the s ubject, cannot 
therefore be treated as ratio decendi  in the matter. In fact, the question of 
validity of talaq-e-biddat’ has never been debated be fore this Court.  This is 
the first occasion that the matter is being considered after rival submissions 
have been advanced.  Moreover, in the above judgment the Court was 
adjudicating a dispute regarding maintenance under Se ction 125 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure.  The husband, in order to avoid the liability of 
maintenance pleaded that he had divorced his wife.  Th is Court in the above 
judgment decided the factual issue as under: 
“15. The plea taken by Respondent 2 husband in his wr itten statement 
may be renoticed. Respondent 2 vaguely makes certain g eneralized 
accusations against the appellant wife and states that eve r since the 
marriage he found his wife to be sharp, shrewd and m ischievous. 
Accusing the wife of having brought disgrace to the fam ily, Respondent 2 
proceeds to state, vide para 12 (translated into English ) — “The 
answering respondent, feeling fed up with all such a ctivities unbecoming 
of the petitioner wife, has divorced her on 11-7-1987. ” The particulars of 
the alleged talaq are not pleaded nor the circumstances under which and 
the persons, if any, in whose presence talaq was pron ounced have been 
stated. Such deficiency continued to prevail even duri ng the trial and 
Respondent 2, except examining himself, adduced no e vidence in proof of 201 talaq said to have been given by him on 11-7-1987. T here are no reasons 
substantiated in justification of talaq and no plea or proof that any effort 
at reconciliation preceded the talaq. 
16. We are also of the opinion that the talaq to be effe ctive has to be 
pronounced. The term “pronounce” means to proclaim, to utter formally, 
to utter rhetorically, to declare, to utter, to articulate (se e Chambers 20th 
Century Dictionary, New Edition, p. 1030). There is n o proof of talaq 
having taken place on 11-7-1987. What the High Court ha s upheld as 
talaq is the plea taken in the written statement and its comm unication to 
the wife by delivering a copy of the written statement on  5-12-1990. We 
are very clear in our mind that a mere plea taken in t he written 
statement of a divorce having been pronounced sometim e in the past 
cannot by itself be treated as effectuating talaq on the d ate of delivery of 
the copy of the written statement to the wife. Respondent 2 ought to have 
adduced evidence and proved the pronouncement of talaq  on 11-7-1987 
and if he failed in proving the plea raised in the w ritten statement, the 
plea ought to have been treated as failed. We do not a gree with the view 
propounded in the decided cases referred to by Mulla  and Dr Tahir 
Mahmood in their respective commentaries, wherein a m ere plea of 
previous talaq taken in the written statement, though unsu bstantiated, 
has been accepted as proof of talaq bringing to an e nd the marital 
relationship with effect from the date of filing of the written statement. A 
plea of previous divorce taken in the written statement c annot at all be 
treated as pronouncement of talaq by the husband on the wife on the 
date of filing of the written statement in the Court follo wed by delivery of 
a copy thereof to the wife. So also the affidavit dated  31-8-1988, filed in 
some previous judicial proceedings not inter partes, containing a self-
serving statement of Respondent 2, could not have been r ead in evidence 
as relevant and of any value. 
17. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed . Neither the marriage 
between the parties stands dissolved on 5-12-1990 nor does the liability 
of Respondent 2 to pay maintenance comes to an end on th at day. 
Respondent 2 shall continue to remain liable for payme nt of 
maintenance until the obligation comes to an end in acc ordance with 
law. The costs in this appeal shall be borne by Resp ondent 2.” 
 
The liability to pay maintenance was accepted, not be cause ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
– triple talaq was not valid in law, but because the hu sband had not been 
able to establish the factum of divorce.  It is therefor e not possible to accept 
the submission made by learned counsel on the strength of the Shamim Ara 
case 12 . 202 139. Having given our thoughtful consideration on the entirety of the 
issue, we are persuaded to accept the counsel of Mr. Kapil Sibal and Mr. 
Salman Khurshid, Senior Advocates.  It would be appro priate for us, to 
refrain from entertaining a determination on the iss ue in hand, irrespective 
of the opinion expressed in the four judgments relied upon by learned 
counsel for the petitioners, and the Quranic verses and  ‘hadiths’ relied upon 
by the rival parties.  We truly do not find ourselves, upto the task.  We have 
chosen this course, because we are satisfied, that the c ontroversy can be 
finally adjudicated, even in the absence of an answer  to the proposition 
posed in the instant part of the consideration.  
IV.  Is the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, a matter of fa ith for Muslims? If yes, 
whether it is a constituent of their ‘personal law’ ? 
 
140. In the two preceding parts of our consideration, we have not been 
able to persuade ourselves to disapprove and derecogn ize the practice of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’.  It may however still be possible for  us, to accept the 
petitioners’ prayer, if it can be concluded, that ‘talaq- e-biddat’ was not a 
constituent of ‘personal law’ of Sunni Muslims belong ing to the Hanafi 
school.  And may be, it was merely a usage or custom.  We would, now 
attempt to determine an answer to the above  noted poser.  
141. As a historical fact, ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is known to  have crept into 
Muslim tradition more than 1400 years ago, at the instanc e of Umayyad 
monarchs.  It can certainly be traced to the period of  Caliph Umar – a senior 
companion of Prophet Muhammad.  Caliph Umar succeede d Abu Bakr 
(632-634) as the second Caliph on 23.8.634.  If this  position is correct, then 
the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ can most certainly be s tated to have 203 originated some 1400 years ago.  Factually, Mr. Kapil  Sibal had repeatedly 
emphasized the above factual aspects, and the same were  not repudiated by 
any of learned counsel (-and private individuals) re presenting the 
petitioner’s cause. 
142. The fact, that the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was w idespread can 
also not be disputed.  In Part-5 of the instant judgmen t – Abrogation of the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ by legislation, the world over, in Islamic, as well 
as, non-Islamic States, we have dealt with legislatio ns at the hands of Arab 
States – Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,  Libiya, Mrocco, 
Sudan, Syria, Tunesia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen; we have also dealt 
with legislations by South-east Asian States – Indonesi a, Malaysia, 
Philippines; we have additionally dealt with legislat ions by sub-continental 
States – Pakistan and Bangladesh.  All these countries h ave legislated with 
reference to - ‘talaq-e-biddat’, in one form or the othe r.  What can certainly 
be drawn from all these legislations is, that ‘talaq-e-b iddat’ was a prevalent 
practice amongst Muslims, in these countries.  Had it n ot been so, 
legislation would not have been required on the subjec t.   It is therefore 
clear that the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ was not limite d to certain areas, 
but was widespread.  
143. We have also extracted in the submissions advance d by learned 
counsel representing the rival parties, ‘hadiths’ reli ed upon by them, to 
substantiate their rival contentions.  The debate and di scussion amongst 
Islamic jurists in the relevant ‘hadiths’ reveal, that th e practice of triple 
talaq was certainly, in vogue amongst Muslims, whether it was considered 204 and treated as irregular or sinful, is quite another m atter.  All were agreed, 
that though considered as improper and sacrilegious, it was indeed 
accepted as lawful.  This debate and discussion in the Muslim community – 
as has been presently demonstrated by the disputants dur ing the course of 
hearing, and as has been highlighted through articles which appeared in 
the media (at least during the course of hearing), pre sumably by 
knowledgeable individuals, reveal views about its sus tenance.  The only 
debate in these articles was about the consistence or o therwise, of the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – with Islamic values.  N ot that, the practice was 
not prevalent.  The ongoing discussion and dialogue, clearly reveal, if 
nothing else, that the practice is still widely prevale nt and in vogue. 
144. The fact, that about 90% of the Sunnis in India, b elong to the 
Hanafi school, and that, they have been adopting ‘talaq -e-biddat’ as a valid 
form of divorce, is also not a matter of dispute.  The  very fact, that the issue 
is being forcefully canvassed, before the highest Cou rt of the land, and at 
that – before a Constitution Bench, is proof enough.  The fact that the 
judgment of the Privy Council in the Rashid Ahmad ca se 1 as far back as in 
1932, upheld the severance of the matrimonial tie, bas ed on the fact that 
‘talaq’ had been uttered thrice by the husband, demonstra tes not only its 
reality, but its enforcement, for the determination of the civil rights of the 
parties.  It is therefore clear, that amongst Sunni Musl ims belonging to the 
Hanafi school, the practice of  ‘talaq-e-biddat’, has been very much 
prevalent, since time immemorial.  It has been widesp read amongst 
Muslims in countries with Muslim popularity.  Even tho ugh it is considered 205 as irreligious within the religious denomination in which the practice is 
prevalent, yet the denomination considers it valid in la w.  Those following 
this practice have concededly allowed their civil righ ts to be settled thereon.  
‘Talaq-e-biddat’ is practiced in India by 90% of the M uslims (who belong to 
the Hanafi school).  The Muslim population in India is over 13% (-about 
sixteen crores) out of which 4-5 crores are Shias, a nd the remaining are 
Sunnis (besides, about 10 lakhs Ahmadias) – mostly be longing to the Hanafi 
school. And therefore, it would not be incorrect to conc lude, that an 
overwhelming majority of Muslims in India, have had   recourse to the 
severance of their matrimonial ties, by way of ‘talaq-e -biddat’ – as a matter 
of their religious belief – as a matter of their faith.    
145. We are satisfied, that the practice of ‘talaq-e-bid dat’ has to be 
considered integral to the religious denomination in question – Sunnis 
belonging to the Hanafi school.  There is not the sli ghtest reason for us to 
record otherwise.  We are of the view, that the practice  of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, 
has had the sanction and approval of the religious den omination which 
practiced it, and as such, there can be no doubt that the practice, is a part 
of their ‘personal law’. 
V.  Did the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application  Act, 1937 confer  
statutory status to the subjects regulated by the said le gislation ? 
 
146. ‘Personal law’ has a constitutional protection.  This protection is 
extended to ‘personal law’ through Article 25 of the Constitution.  It needs 
to be kept in mind, that the stature of ‘personal law’ is  that of a 
fundamental right.  The elevation of ‘personal law’ to  this stature came 
about when the Constitution came into force.  This was because Article 25 206 was included in Part III of the Constitution.  Stated diff erently, ‘personal 
law’ of every religious denomination, is protected fr om invasion and breach, 
except as provided by and under Article 25.   
147. The contention now being dealt with, was raised wi th the object of 
demonstrating, that after the enactment of the Muslim Per sonal Law 
(Shariat) Application Act, 1937, the questions and subj ects covered by the 
Shariat Act, ceased to be ‘personal law’, and got trans formed into ‘statutory 
law’.  It is in this context, that it was submitted, by Ms. Indira Jaising, 
learned senior counsel and some others, that the tag of ‘personal law’ got 
removed from the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, after the enactment of 
the Shariat Act, at least for the questions/subjects with reference to which 
the legislation was enacted.  Insofar as the present con troversy is 
concerned, suffice it to notice, that the enactment inclu ded “… dissolution 
of marriage, including talaq …” amongst the questions /subjects covered by 
the Shariat Act. And obviously, when the parties are Mu slims, ‘talaq’ 
includes ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  The pointed contention must be understood to 
mean, that after the enactment of the Shariat Act, dissol ution of marriage 
amongst Muslims including ‘talaq’ (and, ‘talaq-e-bidda t’) had to be 
considered as regulated through a State legislation. 
148. Having become a part of a State enactment, before th e Constitution 
of India came into force, it was the submission of le arned senior counsel, 
that all laws in force immediately before the commence ment of the 
Constitution, would continue to be in force even afte rwards.  For the instant 
assertion, reliance was placed on Article 372 of the C onstitution.  We may 207 only state at this juncture, if the first proposition urged  by the learned 
senior counsel is correct (that dissolution of marriag e amongst Muslims 
including ‘talaq’ was regulated statutorily after the 193 7 Act), then the latter 
part of the submission advanced, has undoubtedly to be accepted as 
accurate.  
149. We have already enumerated the relevant provisio ns of the Shariat 
Act (-for details, refer to Part-4 – Legislation in In dia, in the field of Muslim 
‘personal law’).  A perusal of Section 2 thereof (ex tracted in paragraph 23 
above) reveals, that on the questions/subjects of intesta te succession, 
special property of females, including personal pro perty inherited or 
obtained under contract or gift or any other provision of ‘personal law’, 
marriage, dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila, zihar, lian, khula and 
mubaraat, maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trus ts and trust 
properties, and wakfs, “… the rule of decision …”, wh ere the parties are 
Muslims, shall be “… the Muslim Personal Law – Shar iat.  The submission 
of the learned counsel representing the petitioners, in  support of the instant 
contention was, that since the “rule of the decision” inter alia  with reference 
to ‘talaq’ (-‘talaq-e-biddat’), was thereafter to be reg ulated in terms of the 
Shariat Act, what was ‘personal law’ (-prior to the abo ve enactment), came 
to be transformed into ‘statutory law’.  This, accordi ng to learned counsel 
for the petitioners, has a significant bearing, inasmuc h as, what was 
considered as ‘personal law’ prior to the Shariat Act,  became an Act of the 
State.  Having become an Act of the State, it was submitted , that it has to 
satisfy the requirements of Part III – Fundamental Rig hts, of the 208 Constitution.  This, it was pointed out, is indeed the e xpress mandate of 
Article 13(1), which provides that laws in force immed iately before the 
commencement of the Constitution, insofar as they are in consistent with 
the provisions of Part III of the Constitution, shall to  the extent of such 
inconsistency, be considered as void. 
150. In order to support the issue being canvassed, it was submitted, 
that no “rule of decision” can be violative of Part II I of the Constitution.  And 
“rule of decision” on questions/subjects covered by th e Shariat Act, would 
be deemed to be matters of State determination. Learned senior counsel was 
however candid, in fairly acknowledging, that ‘person al laws’ which 
pertained to disputes between the family and private in dividuals (where the 
State had no role), cannot be subject to a challenge on the ground, that they 
are violative of the fundamental rights contained in Pa rt III of the 
Constitution.  The simple logic canvassed by learned  counsel was, that all 
questions pertaining to different ‘personal laws’ amon gst Muslims having 
been converted into “rule of decision” could no long er be treated as private 
matters between the parties, nor would they be treated as matters of 
‘personal law’’.  In addition, the logic adopted to ca nvass the above position 
was, that if it did not alter the earlier position, what w as the purpose of 
bringing in the legislation (the Shariat Act).  
151. On the assumption, that ‘personal law’ stood trans formed into 
‘statutory law’, learned senior counsel for the petitio ners assailed the 
constitutional validity of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, on the touch stone of Articles 14, 
15 and 21 of the Constitution. 209 152. Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel appear ing for the AIMPLB, 
drew our attention to the debates in the Legislative Asse mbly, whereupon, 
the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 193 7 was enacted (for 
details, refer to paragraph 94).  Having invited our a ttention to the above 
debates and more particularly to the statements of Abdu l Qaiyum 
(representing North-West Frontier Province), it was con tended, that the 
legislation under reference, was not enacted with the o bject of giving a 
statutory status to the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat ’.  It was asserted, 
that the object was merely to negate the effect of usages  and customs.  It 
was pointed out, that even though Muslims were to be regu lated under the 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, yet customs and usa ges to the contrary 
were being given an overriding effect.  To the exten t that customs and 
usages even of local tribes (-as also of local villa ges), were being given an 
overriding position over Muslim ‘personal law’, in the course of judicial 
determination, even where the parties were Muslims.  I t was therefore 
asserted, that it would be wrong to assume, that the aim a nd object of the 
legislators, while enacting the Shariat Act, was to gi ve statutory status to 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  In other words, it was the contention of 
learned senior counsel, that the Shariat Act should onl y be understood as 
having negated customary practices and usages, which  were in conflict with 
the existing Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’. 
153. Mr. V. Giri, learned senior counsel, supported the above contention 
by placing reliance on Section 2 of the Muslim Person al Law (Shariat) 
Application Act, 1937, on  behalf of the AIMPLB.  It w as asserted, that 210 Section 2 has a non obstante  clause.  It was pointed out, that aforestated 
non obstante  clause was merely relatable to customs and usages.  A  perusal 
of Section 2, according to learned senior counsel, wo uld leave no room for 
any doubt, that the customs and usages referred to in S ection 2 of the 
Shariat Act, were only such customs and usages as wer e in conflict with the 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  It was according ly submitted, that the 
object behind Section 2 of the Shariat Act was to decla re the Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, as the “rule of decision ”, in situations where 
customs and usages were to the contrary. 
154. Learned senior counsel for the respondents desir ed us to accept 
their point of view, for yet another reason.  It was su bmitted, that the 
Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937, d id not decide what 
was, and what was not, Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shari at’.  It was therefore 
pointed out, that it would be a misnomer to consider, tha t the Shariat Act, 
legislated in the field of Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘ Shariat’  in any manner on 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  It was submitted, that Muslim ‘personal 
law’ – ‘Shariat’ remained what it was. It was pointed ou t, that articles of 
faith as have been expressed on the questions/subjects regulated by the 
Shariat Act, have not been dealt with in the Act, they remained the same as 
were understood by the followers of that faith.  It was accordingly 
contended, that the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, was not 
introduced/enacted through the Shariat Act.  It was als o pointed out, that 
the Shariat Act did not expound or propound the paramet ers on different 
questions or subjects, as were applicable to the Sunnis  and Shias, and their 211 different schools.  It was accordingly submitted, that it  would be a 
misnomer to interpret the provisions of the Shariat Act,  as having given 
statutory status to different questions/subjects, with res pect to ‘personal 
law’ of Muslims.  It was therefore contended, that the M uslim ‘personal law’ 
– ‘Shariat’ was never metamorphosed  into a statute.  It was therefore 
contended, that it would be wholly improper to assume tha t Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’ was given statutory effect , through the Muslim 
Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937. 
155. Based on the above contentions, it was submitted, tha t the Muslim 
Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 cannot be  treated as having 
conferred statutory status on the Muslim ‘personal law’  – ‘Shariat’, and as 
such, the same cannot be treated as a statutory enactme nt, so as to be 
tested for its validity in the manner contemplated und er Article 13(1) of the 
Constitution. 
156. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the  submissions 
advanced at the hands of learned counsel for the rival  parties.  Having 
closely examined Section 2 of the Muslim Personal Law  (Shariat) Application 
Act, 1937, we are of the view, that the limited purpose o f the aforesaid 
provision was to negate the overriding effect of usag es and customs over the 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  This determinati on of ours clearly 
emerges even from the debates in the Legislative Assem bly before the 
enactment of Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Applicatio n Act, 1937.  In fact, 
the statements of H.M. Abdullah (representing West Centra l Punjab) and 
Abdul Qaiyum (representing North-West Frontier Province ), leave no room 212 for any doubt, that the objective sought to be achieved  by the ‘Shariat’ was 
inter alia  to negate the overriding effect on customs and usage s over the 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  The debates rev eal that customs and 
usages by tribals were being given overriding effect by courts while 
determining issues between Muslims.  Even usages an d customs of  
particular villages were given overriding effect over  Muslim ‘personal law’ – 
‘Shariat’.  We are also satisfied to accept the contentio n of the learned 
senior counsel, that a perusal of Section 2 and the non obstante  clause used 
therein, has that effect.  The Shariat Act, in our consid ered view, neither 
lays down nor declares the Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘ Shariat’.  Not even, on 
the questions/subjects covered by the legislation.  The re is no room for any 
doubt, that there is substantial divergence of norms reg ulating Shias and 
Sunnis.  There was further divergence of norms, in t heir respective schools.  
The Shariat Act did not crystalise the norms as were to  be applicable to 
Shias and Sunnis, or their respective schools.  What w as sought to be done 
through the Shariat Act, in our considered view, was to preserve Muslim 
‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, as it existed from time imm emorial.  We are of the 
view, that the Shariat Act recognizes the Muslim ‘persona l law’ as the ‘rule 
of decision’ in the same manner as Article 25 recogni ses the supremacy and 
enforceability of ‘personal law’ of all religions.  We are accordingly satisfied, 
that Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’ as body of law,  was perpetuated by 
the Shariat Act, and what had become ambiguous (due to i nundations 
through customs and usages), was clarified and cryst alised. In contrast, if 
such a plea had been raised with reference to the Diss olution of Muslim 213 Marriages Act, 1939, which legislatively postulated the  grounds of divorce 
for Muslim women, the submission would have been acc eptable.  The 1939 
Act would form a part of ‘statutory law’, and not ‘per sonal law’.  We are 
therefore constrained to accept the contention advanced by  learned counsel 
for the respondents, that the proposition canvassed on b ehalf of the 
petitioners, namely, that the Muslim Personal Law (Shar iat) Application Act, 
1937 conferred statutory status, on the questions/subje cts governed by the 
Shariat Act, cannot be accepted.  That being the positio n, Muslim ‘personal 
law’ – ‘Shariat’ cannot be considered as a State enactm ent.  
157. In view of the conclusions recorded in the fore going paragraph, it is 
not possible for us to accept, the contention advanced o n behalf of the 
petitioners, that the questions/subjects covered by the Mus lim Personal 
Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 ceased to be ‘per sonal law’ and got 
transformed into ‘statutory law’.  Having concluded as above, we must also 
hold (-which we do), that the practices of Muslim ‘pers onal law’ – ‘Shariat’ 
cannot be required to satisfy the provisions contained in Part III – 
Fundamental Rights, of the Constitution, applicable to S tate actions, in 
terms of Article 13 of the Constitution. 
VI.  Does ‘talaq-e-biddat’, violate the parameters expr essed in Article 25 of 
the Constitution ? 
 
158. In our consideration recorded hereinabove, we h ave held, that the 
provisions of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Appl ication Act, 1937 did 
not alter the ‘personal law’ status of the Muslim ‘perso nal law’ – ‘Shariat’.  
We shall now deal with the next step. Since ‘talaq-e-b iddat’ remains a 
matter of ‘personal law’, applicable to a Sunni Musli m belonging to the 214 Hanafi school, can it be declared as not enforceable in law, as it violates the 
parameters expressed in Article 25 (which is also on e of the pointed 
contentions of those supporting the petitioners case)? 
159. The above proposition is strenuously opposed by all the learned 
counsel who appeared on behalf of the respondents, mo re particularly, 
learned senior counsel representing the AIMPLB.  Duri ng the course of the 
instant opposition, our attention was invited to the judgmen t rendered by 
the Bombay High Court in the Narasu Appa Mali case 23 .  We may briefly 
advert thereto.  In the said judgment authored by M.C. Ch agla, CJ, in 
paragraph 13 and Gajendragadkar, J. (as he then was)  in paragraph 23, 
recorded the following observations: 
“13. That this distinction is recognised by the Leg islature is clear if one looks to 
the language of S. 112, Government of India Act, 19 15. That section deals with 
the law to be administered by the High Courts and i t provides that the High 
Courts shall, in matters of inheritance and success ion to lands, rents and 
goods, and in matters of contract and dealing betwe en party and party, when 
both parties are subject to the same personal law o r custom having the force of 
law, decide according to that personal law or custo m, and when the parties are 
subject to different personal laws or customs havin g the force of law, decide 
according to the law or custom to which the defenda nt is subject . Therefore, a 
clear distinction is drawn between personal law and  custom having the force of 
law. This is a provision in the Constitution Act, a nd having this model before 
them the Constituent Assembly in defining “law” in Art. 13 have expressly and 
advisedly used only the expression “custom or usage ” and have omitted 
personal law. This, in our opinion, is a very clear  pointer to the intention of the 
Constitution-making body to exclude personal law fr om the purview of Art. 13. 
There are other pointers as well. Article 17 abolis hes untouchability and 
forbids its practice in any form. Article 25(2)(b) enables the State to make laws 
for the purpose of throwing open of Hindu religious  institutions of a public 
character to all classes and sections of Hindus. No w, if Hindu personal law 
became void by reason of Art. 13 and by reason of a ny of its provisions 
contravening any fundamental right, then it was unn ecessary specifically to 
provide in Art. 17 and Art. 25(2)(b) for certain as pects of Hindu personal law 
which contravened Arts. 14 and 15 . This clearly shows that only in certain 
respects has the Constitution dealt with personal l aw. The very presence of Art. 
44 in the Constitution recognizes the existence of separate personal laws, and 
Entry No. 5 in the Concurrent List gives power to t he Legislatures to pass laws 
affecting personal law. The scheme of the Constitut ion, therefore, seems to be 
to leave personal law unaffected except where speci fic provision is made with 215 regard to it and leave it to the Legislatures in fu ture to modify and improve it 
and ultimately to put on the statute book a common and uniform Code . Our 
attention has been drawn to S. 292, Government of I ndia Act, 1935, which 
provides that all the law in force in British India  shall continue in force until 
altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legis lature or other competent 
authority, and S. 293 deals with adaptation of exis ting penal laws. There is a 
similar provision in our Constitution in Art. 372(1 ) and Art. 372(2). It is 
contended that the laws which are to continue in fo rce under Art. 372(1) 
include personal laws, and as these laws are to con tinue in force subject to the 
other provisions of the Constitution, it is urged t hat by reason of Art. 13(1) any 
provision in any personal law which is inconsistent  with fundamental rights 
would be void. But it is clear from the language of  Arts. 372(1) and (2) that the 
expression “laws in force” used in this article does  not include personal 
law because Art. 372(2) entitles the President to make ad aptations and 
modifications to the law in force by way of repeal or  amendment, and 
surely it cannot be contended that it was intended by this provision to 
authorise the President to make alterations or adaptations in the 
personal law of any community. Although the point urg ed before us is 
not by any means free from difficulty, on the whole after a careful 
consideration of the various provisions of the Constit ution, we have come 
to the conclusion that personal law is not included in the expression 
“laws in force” used in Art. 13(1) . 
23.  …..The Constitution of India itself recognises the existence of these 
personal laws in terms when it deals with the topics f alling under 
personal law in item 5 in the Concurrent List—List III.  This item deals 
with the topics of marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; 
wills, intestacy and succession; joint family and par tition; all matters in 
respect of which parties in judicial proceedings were  immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution subject to their per sonal law. 
Thus it is competent either to the State or the Union Legis lature to 
legislate on topics falling within the purview of the p ersonal law and yet 
the expression “personal law” is not used in Art. 13.  because, in my 
opinion, the framers of the Constitution wanted to leav e the personal 
laws outside the ambit of Part III of the Constitution . They must have 
been aware that these personal laws needed to be refor med in many 
material particulars and in fact they wanted to abolish  these different 
personal laws and to evolve one common code. Yet they did not wish that 
the provisions of the personal laws should be challen ged by reason of the 
fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitu tion and so they 
did not intend to include these personal laws within the  definition of the 
expression “laws in force.” Therefore, I agree with the learned Chief 
Justice in holding that the personal laws do not fall w ithin Art. 13(1) at 
all.” 
 
160. It seems to us, that the position expressed by the B ombay High 
Court, as has been extracted above, deserves to be con sidered as the 216 presently declared position of law, more particularly,  because it was 
conceded on behalf of the learned Attorney General fo r India, that the 
judgment rendered by the Bombay High Court in the Naras u Appa Mali 
case 23 , has been upheld by the Court in the Shri Krishna Sin gh case 29 and 
the Maharshi Avadhesh 32  cases, wherein, this Court had tested the 
‘personal laws’ on the touchstone of fundamental rights in the cases of 
Mohd. Ahmed Khan v. Shah Bano Begum 37  (by a 5-Judge Constitution 
Bench), Daniel Latifi v. Union of India 38  (by a 5-Judge Constitution Bench), 
and in the John Vallamattom case 9, (by a 3-Judge Division Bench).  An 
extract of the written submissions placed on the record of the case, on 
behalf of the Union of India, has been reproduced ve rbatim in paragraph 71 
above. 
161. The fair concession made at the hands of the lear ned Attorney 
General, is reason enough for us to accept the proposi tion, and the legal 
position expressed by the Bombay High Court, relevant p art whereof has 
been extracted above.  Despite our instant determination , it is essential for 
us to notice a few judgments on the issue, which woul d put a closure to the 
matter. 
(i) Reference may first of all be made to the Shri Kri shna Singh case 29 .  
The factual position which arose in the above case, m ay be noticed as 
under: 
 ‘S’, a Hindu ascetic, established the Garwaghat Math at Varanasi in 1925.  
The ‘math’ (monastery) comprised of Bangla Kuti and o ther buildings and 
                                                 
37  (1985) 2 SCC 556  
38  (2001) 7 SCC 740 217 lands endowed by his devotees.  ‘S’ belonged to the S ant Math Sampradaya, 
which is a religious denomination of the Dasnami sect , founded by the 
‘Sankaracharya’ (head of a monastery).  During this l ifetime, ‘S’ initiated ‘A’ 
as his ‘chela’ (disciple) and gave him full rights o f initiation and ‘bhesh’ 
(spiritual authority).  After the death of ‘S’, his ‘bh esh’ and sampradaya 
(succession of master or disciples) gave ‘A’ the ‘ch adar mahanti’ (cloak of the 
chief priest) of the ‘math’ and made him the ‘mahant’ ( chief priest), 
according to the wishes of ‘S’.  ‘A’ thereafter initiate d the plaintiff, a ‘sudra’ 
(lowest caste of the four Hindu castes), as his ‘chela ’ according to the 
custom and usage of the sect and after this death, in ac cordance with his 
wishes the ‘mahants’ and ‘sanyasis’ (persons leading a life of renunciation) 
of the ‘bhesh’ and ‘sampradaya’ gave the ‘chadar maha nti’ to the plaintiff, 
and installed him as the ‘mahant’ of the ‘math’ in the  place of ‘A’, by 
executing a document to that effect.  ‘A’ during his life  time purchased two 
houses in the city of Varanasi, from out of the incom e of the ‘math’.  When 
the plaintiff became the ‘mahant’, he brought a suit for  ejectment of 
Respondents 2 to 5 from one of those houses, on the gro und that 
Respondent 2 after taking the house on rent from ‘A’, h ad unlawfully sublet 
the premises to Respondents 3 to 5.  The defendant respo ndents inter alia 
pleaded, that they were in occupation of the house as ‘ chelas’ of ‘A’, in their 
own rights, by virtue of a licence granted to them by ‘ A’, and therefore, on 
his death his natural son and disciple, the appellant became the owner 
thereof.  One of the questions which needed to be deter mined in the above 
controversy, was formulated as under: 218 (1) Whether the plaintiff being a ‘sudra’ could not be  ordained to a 
religious order and become a ‘sanyasi’ or ‘yati’ and  therefore, installed as 
‘mahant’ according to the tenets of the Sant Mat Samprada ya? 
 
In recording its conclusions with reference to Article  25, in the above 
disputed issue, this Court held as under: 
“17. It would be convenient, at the outset, to deal with th e view 
expressed by the High Court that the strict rule enjoined  by the Smriti 
writers as a result of which Sudras were considered to  be incapable of 
entering the order of yati or sanyasi, has ceased to b e valid because of 
the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution. In 
our opinion, the learned Judge failed to appreciate th at Part III of the 
Constitution does not touch upon the personal laws of the parties. In 
applying the personal laws of the parties, he could no t introduce his own 
concepts of modern times but should have enforced the  law as derived 
from recognised and authoritative sources of Hindu la w i.e. Smritis and 
commentaries referred to, as interpreted in the judgmen ts of various 
High Courts, except, where such law is altered by any usage or custom 
or is modified or abrogated by statute .” 
 
(ii)  Reference is also essential to Madhu Kishwar v.  State of Bihar 39 ,  
wherein this Court observed a under: 
“It is worthwhile to account some legislation on the su bject. The Hindu 
Succession Act governs and prescribes rules of succ ession applicable to 
a large majority of Indians being Hindus, Sikhs, Bu ddhists, Jains etc. 
whereunder since 1956, if not earlier, the female hei r is put on a par with 
a male heir. Next in the line of numbers is the Shari at law, applicable to 
Muslims, whereunder the female heir has an unequal s hare in the 
inheritance, by and large half of what a male gets. Th en comes the Indian 
Succession Act which applies to Christians and by and  large to people 
not covered under the aforesaid two laws, conferring  in a certain manner 
heirship on females as also males . Certain chapters thereof are not made 
applicable to certain communities. Sub-section (2) of Section 2 of the 
Hindu Succession Act significantly provides that nothi ng contained in 
the Act shall apply to the members of any Scheduled Tr ibe within the 
meaning of clause (25) of Article 366 of the Constituti on, unless 
otherwise directed by the Central Government by means of a notification 
in the Official Gazette . Section 3(2) further provides that in the Act, 
unless the context otherwise requires, words importing the masculine 
gender shall not be taken to include females. General rule of legislative 
practice is that unless there is anything repugnant in the  subject or 
context, words importing the masculine gender used in s tatutes are to be 
                                                 
39  (1996) 5 SCC 125 219 taken to include females. Attention be drawn to Section 13  of the General 
Clauses Act. But in matters of succession the general ru le of plurality 
would have to be applied with circumspection. The afor e provision thus 
appears to have been inserted ex abundanti cautela. E ven under Section  
3 of the Indian Succession Act, the State Government is e mpowered to 
exempt any race, sect or tripe from the operation of the Act and the 
tribes of Mundas, Oraons, Santhals etc. in the State of Bihar, who are 
included in our concern, have been so exempted. Thu s neither the Hindu 
Succession Act, nor even the Shariat law is applicabl e to the custom-
governed tribals. And custom, as is well recognized,  varies from people to 
people and region to region .” 
In the face of these divisions and visible barricades  put up by the 
sensitive tribal people valuing their own customs, trad itions and usages, 
judicially enforcing on them the principles of perso nal laws applicable to 
others, on an elitist approach or on equality principl e, by judicial 
activism, is a difficult and mind-boggling effort. Br other K. Ramaswamy, 
J. seems to have taken the view that Indian legislatures (and 
Governments too) would not prompt themselves to activate in  this 
direction because of political reasons and in this si tuation, an activist 
court. apolitical as it avowedly is, could get into acti on and legislate 
broadly on the lines as suggested by the petitioners in their written 
submissions. However laudable, desirable and attractiv e the result may  
seem, it has happily been viewed by our learned broth er that an activist 
court is not fully equipped to cope with the details and intricacies of the 
legislative subject and can at best advise and focus att ention on the 
State polity on the problem and shake it from its slumbe r, goading it to 
awaken, march and reach the goal. For, in whatever me asure be the 
concern of the court, it compulsively needs to apply, m otion, described in 
judicial parlance as self-restraint. We agree therefor e with brother K. 
Ramaswamy, J. as summed up by him in the paragraph e nding on p.36 
(para 46) of his judgment that under the circumstances it is not desirable 
to declare the customs of tribal inhabitants as offendin g Articles 14, 45 
and 21 of the Constitution and each case must be examin ed when full 
facts are placed before the court . 
With regard to the statutory provisions of the Act, he has  proposed to the 
reading down of Sections 7 and 8 in order to preserve  their 
constitutionality. This approach is available from p. 36 (paras 47, 48) 
onwards of his judgment. The words "male descendant wh erever 
occurring , would include "female descendants". It is a lso proposed that 
even though the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act , 1925 in terms 
would not apply to the Schedule Tribes, their general principles 
composing of justice, equity and fair play would app ly to them. On this 
basis it has been proposed to take the view that the Sched uled Tribe 
women would succeed to the estate of paternal parent, br other or 
husband as heirs by intestate succession and inherit the  property in 
equal shares with the male heir with absolute rights a s per the principles 
of the Hindu Succession Act as also the Indian Succes sion Act. However, 
much we may like the law to be so we regret our inabil ity to subscribe to 220 the means in achieving such objective. If this be the r oute of return on 
the court's entering the thicket, it would follow a bee line for similar 
claims in diverse situations, not stopping at tribal de finitions, and a 
deafening uproar to bring other systems of law in li ne with the line with 
the systems of law in line with the Hindu Succession Act and the Indian 
Succession Act as models . Rules of succession are, indeed susceptible of 
providing differential treatment, not necessarily equal.  Non-uniformities 
would not in all events violate Article 14. Judge-made amendments to 
provisions, should normally be avoided. We are thus constrained to take 
this view. even though it may appear to be conservative for adopting a 
cautious approach, and the one proposed by our lear ned brother is, 
regretfully not acceptable to us.” 
 
(iii)  In the Ahmedabad Women Action Group case 30 , this Court recorded 
the questions arising for consideration in pargraphs 1 to 3, which are 
reproduced below: 
“All these Writ Petitions are filed as Public Interest L itigation. In W.P. (C) 
No. 494 of 1996, the reliefs prayed for are as foll ows: 
(a) to declare Muslim Personal Law which allows pol ygamy as void as 
offending Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution; 
(b) to declare Muslim Personal Law which enables a Muslim male to give 
unilateral Talaq to his wife without her consent and wi thout resort to 
judicial process of courts, as void, offending Articl es 13, 14 and 15 of the 
Constitution; 
(c) to declare that the mere fact that a Muslim husband  takes more than 
one wife is an act of cruelty within the meaning of Cl ause VIII (f) 
of Section 2 of Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939; 
(d) to declare that Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 
1986 is void as infringing Articles 14 and 15; 
(e) to further declare that the provisions of Sunni and Shia laws of 
inheritance which discriminate against females in their  share as 
compared to the share of males of the same status, void as 
discriminating against females only on the ground of sex. 
2. In writ Petition (C) No. 496 of 1996, the reliefs pr ayed for are the 
following:- 
(a) to declare Sections 2(2), 5(ii) and (iii), 6 and Explanation to Section 
30 of Hindu Succession Act, 1956, as void offending  Articles 14 and 15 
read with Article 13 of the Constitution of India; 
(b) to declare Section (2) of Hindu Marriage Act, 19 55, as void offending 
Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India; 
(c) to declare Sections 3 (2), 6 and 9 of the Hindu Minority 
and Guardianship Act read with Section 6 of Guardians  and Wards Act 
void; 221 (d) to declare the unfettered and absolute discretion a llowed to a Hindu 
spouse to make testamentary disposition without providing  for an 
ascertained share of his or her spouse and dependant , void.  
3. In writ Petition (C) No. 721 of 1996, the   reliefs    prayed   for   are the 
following : 
(a) to declare Sections 10 and 34 of Indian Divorce Act void and also to 
declare Sections 43 to 46 of the Indian Succession Act void.” 
 
The position expressed in respect of the above questi ons, after noticing the 
legal position propounded by this Court in the Madhu K ishwar case 39 , was 
recorded in paragraph 4 as under: 
“4. At the outset. we would like to state that these Writ P etitions do not 
deserve disposal on merits inasmuch as the arguments a dvanced by the 
learned Senior Advocate before us wholly involve iss ues of State policies 
with which the Court will not ordinarily have any conc ern. Further, we 
find that when similar attempts were made, of course b y others, on 
earlier occasions this Court held that the remedy lies somewhere else 
and not by knocking at the doors of the courts.” 
 
(iv) Reference may also be made to the Sardar Syedna Taher Saifuddin 
Saheb case28 , wherein, this Court held as under: 
“The content of Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution c ame up for 
consideration before this Court in the Commissioner, H indu Religious 
Endowments Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur 
Matt; Mahant Jagannath Ramanuj Das v. The State of Ori ssa; Sri 
Ventatamana Devaru v. The State of Mysore; Durgah Comm ittee, Ajmer 
v. Syed Hussain Ali and several other cases and the main principles 
underlying these provisions have by these decisions  been placed beyond 
controversy.   The first is that the protection of these articles is not 
limited to matters of doctrine or belief they extend also to acts done in 
pursuance of religion and therefore contain a guarante e for rituals and 
observances, ceremonies and modes of worship which are integral parts 
of religion.   The second is that what constitutes an essential part of a 
religion or religious practice has to be decided by the courts with 
reference to the doctrine of a particular religion and include practices 
which are regarded by the community as a part of its religion ”. 
 
(v)  It is also essential to note the N. Adithyan case 33 , wherein this 
Court observed as under: 
“9. This Court, in Seshammal v. State of T.N., (1972 ) 2 SCC 11 again 
reviewed the principles underlying the protection eng rafted in Articles 25 222 and 26 in the context of a challenge made to abolitio n of hereditary right 
of Archaka, and reiterated the position as hereunder : (SCC p.21, paras 
13-14) 
“13. This Court in Sardar Taher Saifuddin Saheb v. S tate of Bombay AIR 
1962 SC 853 has summarized the position in law as fol lows (pp.531 and 
532): 
‘The content of Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution came up for 
consideration before this Court in Commr., Hindu Relig ious Endowments 
v. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt,  Mahant 
Jagannath Ramanuj Das v. State of Orissa, Venkataraman a Devaru v. 
State of Mysore, Durgah Committee, Ajmer v. Syed Hussai n Ali and 
several other cases and the main principles underlyi ng these provisions 
have by these decisions been placed beyond controvers y.  The first is that 
the protection of these articles is not limited to matters of doctrine or 
belief they extend also to acts done in pursuance of  religion and therefore 
contain a guarantee for rituals and observances, cerem onies and modes 
of worship which are integral parts of religion.  Th e second is that what 
constitutes an essential part of a religion or religiou s practice has to be 
decided by the courts with reference to the doctrine of a particular 
religion and include practices which are regarded by  the community as a 
part of its religion .’ 
14. Bearing these principles in mind, we have to app roach the 
controversy in the present case.” 
16.  It is now well settled that Article 25 secures to eve ry person, subject 
of course to public order, health and morality and ot her provisions of 
Part III, including Article 17 freedom to entertain and exhibit by outward 
acts as well as propagate and disseminate such religio us belief according 
to his judgment and conscience for the edification of o thers .  The right of 
the State to impose such restrictions as are desired or found necessary 
on grounds of public order, health and morality is i nbuilt in Articles 25 
and 26 itself.  Article 25(2)(b) ensures the right of the State to make a law 
providing for social welfare and reform besides thro wing open of Hindu 
religious institutions of a public character to all cl asses and sections of 
Hindus and any such rights of the Sate or of the commu nities or classes 
of society were also considered to need due regulatio n in the process of 
harmonizing the various rights .  The vision of the founding fathers of the 
Constitution to liberate the society from blind and ri tualistic adherence 
to mere traditional superstitious beliefs sans reason or  rational basis has 
found expression in the form of Article 17.  The lega l position that the 
protection under Articles 25 and 26 extends a guarante e for rituals and 
observances, ceremonies and modes of worship which are integral parts 
of religion and as to what really constitutes an essenti al part of religion 
or religious practice has to be decided by the courts w ith reference to the 
doctrine of a particular religion or practices regarde d as parts of religion, 
came to be equally firmly laid down .” 223 (vi)   Relevant to the issue is also the judgment in the  Sri Adi 
Visheshwara of Kashi Vishwanath Temple, Varanasi cas e 34 , wherein it was 
held: 
“28…..All secular activities which may be associated w ith religion but 
which do not relate or constitute an essential part of it m ay be amenable 
to State regulations but what constitutes the essential part o f religion 
may be ascertained primarily from the doctrines of tha t religion itself 
according to its tenets, historical background and c hange in evolved 
process etc .  The concept of essentiality is not itself a determi native 
factor.  It is one of the circumstances to be considered  in adjudging 
whether the particular matters of religion or religious practices or belief 
are an integral part of the religion.  It must be deci ded whether the 
practices or matters are considered integral by the com munity itself .  
Though not conclusive, this is also one of the facets to  be noticed.  The 
practice in question is religious in character and whe ther it could be 
regarded as an integral and essential part of the reli gion and if the court 
finds upon evidence adduced before it that it is an int egral or essential 
part of the religion, Article 25 accords protection to i t. …..” 
 
(vii)   The position seems to be clear, that the judicia l interference with 
‘personal law’ can be rendered only in such manner as has been provided 
for in Article 25 of the Constitution.  It is not possi ble to breach the 
parameters of matters of faith, as they have the prote ctive shield of Article 
25 (except as provided in the provision itself). 
162.  To be fair to the learned Attorney General, it is necessary to record, 
that he contested the determination recorded by the Bomb ay High Court in 
the Narasu Appa Mali case 23 , and the judgments rendered by this Court 
affirming the same, by assuming the stance that the po sition needed to be 
revisited (-for details, refer to paragraph 71 above).   There are two reasons 
for us not to entertain this plea.  Firstly, even accord ing to the learned 
Attorney General, the proposition has been accepted by  this Court in at 
least two judgments rendered by Constitution Benches (- of 5-Judge each), 224 and as such, we (-as a 5-Judge Bench) are clearly d isqualified to revisit the 
proposition.  And secondly, a challenge to ‘personal  law’ is also competent 
under Article 25, if the provisions of Part III – Fund amental Rights, of the 
Constitution, are violated, which we shall in any cas e consider (hereinafter) 
while examining the submissions advanced on behalf of the petitioners.  
Likewise, we shall not dwell upon the submissions a dvanced in rebuttal by 
Mr. Kapil Sibal, Senior Advocate. 
163. So far as the challenge to the practice of ‘talaq-e -biddat’, with 
reference to the constitutional mandate contained in Arti cle 25 is 
concerned, we have also delved into the submissions canvassed, during the 
course of hearing. It would be pertinent to mention, that the constitutional 
protection to tenets of ‘personal law’ cannot be interfe red with, as long as 
the same do not infringe “public order, morality and health”, and/or “the 
provisions of Part III of the Constitution”.  This is  the clear position 
expressed in Article 25(1).   
164. We will now venture to examine the instant challeng e with reference 
to the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  It is not possible for us to accept, that the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ can be set aside and held as unsustainable in 
law for the three defined purposes expressed in Arti cle 25(1), namely, for 
reasons of it being contrary to public order, morality  and health.  Viewed 
from any angle, it is impossible to conclude, that the p ractice impinges on 
‘public order’, or for that matter on ‘health’.  We are also satisfied, that it 
has no nexus to ‘morality’, as well.  Therefore, in  our considered view, the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ cannot be struck down on th e three non- 225 permissible/prohibited areas which Article 25 forbids  even in respect of 
‘personal law’. It is therefore not possible for us to uphold the contention 
raised on behalf of the petitioners on this account.   
165. The only remaining ground on which the challen ge to ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ under Article 25 could be sustainable is, if ‘ talaq-e-biddat’ can be 
seen as violative of the provisions of Part III of the  Constitution.  The 
challenge raised at the behest of the petitioners, as has  been extensively 
noticed during the course of recording the submission s advanced on behalf 
of the petitioners, was limited to the practice being all egedly violative of 
Articles 14, 15 and 21.  We shall now examine the ver acity of the instant 
contention.  The fundamental rights enshrined in Articl es 14, 15 and 21 are 
as against State actions.  A challenge under these provi sions (Articles 14, 
15 and 21) can be invoked only against the State.  It i s essential to keep in 
mind, that Article 14 forbids the State from acting arbi trarily.  Article 14 
requires the State to ensure equality before the law an d equal protection of 
the laws, within the territory of India.  Likewise, Ar ticle 15 prohibits the 
State from taking discriminatory action on the grounds of religion, race, 
caste, sex or place of birth, or any of them. The mand ate of Article 15 
requires, the State to treat everyone equally.  Even Ar ticle 21 is a protection 
from State action, inasmuch as, it prohibits the State fr om depriving anyone 
of the rights enuring to them, as a matter of life and liberty (-except, by 
procedure established by law).  We have already reje cted the contention 
advanced on behalf of the petitioners, that the provision s of the Muslim 
Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937, did not alter the ‘personal law’ 226 status of ‘Shariat’.  We have not accepted, that after th e enactment of the 
Shariat Act, the questions/subjects covered by the said legislation ceased to 
be ‘personal law’, and got transformed into ‘statutory law’.  Since we have 
held that Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’ is not bas ed on any State 
Legislative action, we have therefore held, that Muslim  ‘personal law’ – 
‘Shariat’, cannot be tested on the touchstone of bein g a State action. 
Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘Shariat’, in our view, is a matter of ‘personal law’ of 
Muslims, to be traced from four sources, namely, the Quran, the ‘hadith’, 
the ‘ijma’ and the ‘qiyas’. None of these can be attribu ted to any State 
action.  We have also already concluded, that ‘talaq-e- biddat’ is a practice 
amongst Sunni Muslims of the Hanafi school.  A practic e which is a 
component of the ‘faith’ of those belonging to that scho ol.  ‘Personal law’, 
being a matter of religious faith, and not being State a ction, there is no 
question of its being violative of the provisions of t he Constitution of India, 
more particularly, the provisions relied upon by the petitioners, to assail the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, namely, Articles 14, 15 a nd 21 of the 
Constitution. 
VII. Constitutional morality and ‘talaq-e-biddat’:  
 
166. One of the issues canvassed on behalf of the peti tioners, which was 
spearheaded by the learned Attorney General for India,  was on the ground, 
that the constitutional validity of the practice of ‘talaq -e-biddat’ – triple 
talaq, was in breach of constitutional morality.  The question raised before 
us was, whether under a secular Constitution, women c ould be 
discriminated against, only on account of their religi ous identity?  It was 227 asserted, that women belonging to any individual reli gious denomination, 
cannot suffer a significantly inferior status in societ y, as compared to 
women professing some other religion.  It was pointed out, that Muslim 
women, were placed in a position far more vulnerable  than their 
counterparts, who professed other faiths.  It was submitte d, that Hindu, 
Christian, Zoroastrian, Buddhist, Sikh, Jain women, w ere not subjected to 
ouster from their matrimonial relationship, without any r easonable cause, 
certainly not, at the whim of the husband; certainly no t, without due 
consideration of the views expressed by the wife, wh o had the right to repel 
a husband’s claim for divorce.  It was asserted, that ‘talaq-e-biddat’, vests 
an unqualified right with the husband, to terminate the matrimonial 
alliance forthwith, without any reason or justification .  It was submitted, 
that the process of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is extra-judicial, a nd as such, there are 
no remedial measures in place, for raising a challe nge, to the devastating 
consequences on the concerned wife.  It was pointed ou t, that the 
fundamental right to equality, guaranteed to every citize n under Article 14 
of the Constitution, must be read to include, equality amongst women of 
different religious denominations.  It was submitted, th at gender equality, 
gender equity and gender justice, were values intrins ically intertwined in 
the guarantee assured to all (-citizens, and foreigners ) under Article 14.  It 
was asserted, that the conferment of social status based  on patriarchal 
values, so as to place womenfolk at the mercy of men , cannot be sustained 
within the framework of the fundamental rights, provide d for under Part III 
of the Constitution.  It was contended, that besides equa lity, Articles 14 and 228 15 prohibit gender discrimination.  It was pointed out,  that discrimination 
on the ground of sex, was expressly prohibited under Article 15.  It was 
contended, that the right of a woman to human dignity, so cial esteem and 
self-worth were vital facets, of the right to life under Article 21.  It was 
submitted, that gender justice was a constitutional goal , contemplated by 
the framers of the Constitution.  Referring to Article  51A(e) of the 
Constitution, it was pointed out, that one of the declare d fundamental 
duties contained in Part IV of the Constitution, was to ensure that women 
were not subjected to derogatory practices, which impac ted their dignity.  It 
was pointed out, that gender equality and dignity of wo men, were non-
negotiable.  It was highlighted, that women constituted h alf of the nation’s 
population, and inequality against women, should nec essarily entail an 
inference of wholesale gender discrimination.   
167. In order to support the submissions advanced on b ehalf of the 
petitioners, as have been noticed hereinabove, relianc e was placed on Sarla 
Mudgal v. Union of India 40 .  Our pointed attention was drawn to the 
following observations recorded therein: 
“44. Marriage, inheritance, divorce, conversion are as much religious in 
nature and content as any other belief or faith. Going round the fire 
seven rounds or giving consent before Qazi are as mu ch matter of faith 
and conscience as the worship itself . When a Hindu becomes a convert 
by reciting Kalma or a Mulsim becomes Hindu by reciti ng certain 
Mantras it is a matter of belief and conscience. Some o f these practices 
observed by members of one religion may appear to be  excessive and 
even violative of human rights to members of another.  But these are 
matters of faith . Reason and logic have little role to play . The sentiments 
and emotions have to be cooled and tempered by sincer e effort. But today 
there is no Raja Ram Mohan Rai who single handedly b rought about that 
atmosphere which paved the way for Sati abolition. Nor is a statesman of 
                                                 
40  (1995) 3 SCC 635 229 the stature of Pt. Nehru who could pilot through, succes sfully, the Hindu 
Succession Act and Hindu Marriage Act revolutionisi ng the customary 
Hindu Law. The desirability of uniform Code can har dly be doubted. But 
it can concretize only when social climate is properl y built up by elite of 
the society, statesmen amongst leaders who instead of ga ining personal 
mileage rise above and awaken the masses to accept the change .” 
 
Reliance was also placed on the Valsamma Paul case 20 , wherefrom learned 
counsel emphasized on the observations recorded in th e following 
paragraphs: 
“6. The rival contentions give rise to the question of h armonising the 
conflict between the personal law and the constitution al animation 
behind Articles 16(4) and 15(4) of the Constitution. Th e concepts of 
“equality before law” and “equal protection of the la ws” guaranteed by 
Article 14 and its species Articles 15(4) and 16(4) ai m at establishing 
social and economic justice in political democracy to  all sections of 
society, to eliminate inequalities in status and to pro vide facilities and 
opportunities not only amongst individuals but also am ongst groups of 
people  belonging to Scheduled Castes (for short ‘Dalits’), S cheduled 
Tribes (for short ‘Tribes’) and Other Backward Class es of citizens (for 
short ‘OBCs’) to secure adequate means of livelihood and to promote with 
special care the economic and educational interests o f the weaker 
sections of the people, in particular, Dalits and Trib es so as to protect 
them from social injustice and all forms of exploitatio n. By 42 nd  
Constitution (Amendment) Act, secularism and socialism  were brought in 
the Preamble of the Constitution to realise that in a dem ocracy unless all 
sections of society are provided facilities and oppo rtunities to participate 
in political democracy irrespective of caste, religio n and sex, political 
democracy would not last long . Dr Ambedkar in his closing speech on 
the draft Constitution stated on 25-11-1949 that “what we mu st do is 
not to be attained with mere political democracy; we mus t make our 
political democracy a social democracy as well. Poli tical democracy 
cannot last unless there lies on the base of it a social  democracy ”. 
Social democracy means “a way of life which recogni ses liberty, equality 
and fraternity as principles of life ”. They are not separate items in a 
trinity but they form union of trinity. To diversity o ne from the other is to 
defeat the very purpose of democracy. Without equalit y, liberty would 
produce the supremacy of the few over the many. Equali ty without 
liberty would kill individual initiative. Without frate rnity, liberty and 
equality could not become a natural course of things. Articles 15(4) and 
16(4), therefore, intend to remove social and economi c inequality to make 
equal opportunities available in reality . Social and economic justice is a 
right enshrined for the protection of society. The ri ght to social and 
economic justice envisaged in the Preamble and elonga ted in the 230 Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of the Cons titution, in 
particular, Articles 14, 15, 16, 21, 38, 39 and 46 of  the Constitution, is 
to make the quality of the life of the poor, disadvantag ed and disabled 
citizens of society, meaningful . Equal protection in Article 14 requires 
affirmative action for those unequals by providing fa cilities and 
opportunities. While Article 15(1) prohibits discrimin ation on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth, Article 15 (4) enjoins upon the 
State, despite the above injunction and the one provide d in Article 29(2), 
to make special provision for the advancement of any  socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the  Dalits and Tribes. 
Equally, while Article 16(1) guarantees equality of opportunity for all 
citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office 
under the State, Article 16(4) enjoins upon the State to m ake provision 
for reservation for these sections which in the opinion  of the State are 
not adequately represented in the services under the State . Article 335 of 
the Constitution mandates that claims of the members of th e Dalits and 
Tribes shall be taken into consideration in making ap pointments to 
services and posts in connection with affairs of the U nion or of a State 
consistent with the maintenance of efficiency of admin istration. 
Therefore, this Court interpreted that equal protection gu aranteed by 
Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1) is required to operate c onsistently with 
Articles 15(4), 16(4), 38, 39, 46 and 335 of the Cons titution, vide per 
majority in Indra Sawhney v.Union of India [1992 Su pp (3) SCC 217 ] 
known as Mandal case [1992 Supp (3) SCC 217]. In ot her words, equal 
protection requires affirmative action for those unequa ls handicapped 
due to historical facts of untouchability practised for millennium which 
is abolished by Article 17; for tribes living away fr om our national 
mainstream due to social and educational backwardness of OBCs. 
   xxx   xxx   xxx 
16. The Constitution seeks to establish a secular socia list democratic 
republic in which every citizen has equality of status  and of opportunity, 
to promote among the people dignity of the individual, unity and integrity 
of the nation transcending them from caste, sectional, r eligious barriers 
fostering fraternity among them in an integrated Bhar at . The emphasis, 
therefore, is on a citizen to improve excellence and equal status and 
dignity of person. With the advancement of human rights  and 
constitutional philosophy of social and economic demo cracy in a 
democratic polity to all the citizens on equal footing,  secularism has been 
held to be one of the basic features of the Constitution (Vide: S.R. 
Bommai v. Union of India (1994) 3 SCC 1) and egalita rian social order is 
its foundation. Unless free mobility of the people is allowed transcending 
sectional, caste, religious or regional barriers, esta blishment of secular 
socialist order becomes difficult. In State of Karnataka  v. Appa Balu 
Ingale [1995 Supp (4) SCC 469] this Court has held in  para 34 that 
judiciary acts as a bastion of the freedom and of the r ights of the people. 
The Judges are participants in the living stream of na tional life, steering 
the law between the dangers of rigidity and formlessn ess in the seamless 
web of life . A Judge must be a jurist endowed with the legislator's 231 wisdom, historian's search for truth, prophet's vision , capacity to 
respond to the needs of the present, resilience to cope  with the demands 
of the future to decide objectively, disengaging himsel f/herself from every 
personal influence or predilections . The Judges should adapt purposive 
interpretation of the dynamic concepts under the Constit ution and the 
Act with its interpretative armoury to articulate the felt n ecessities of the 
time . Social legislation is not a document for fastidious d ialects but 
means of ordering the life of the people. To construe law one must enter 
into its spirit, its setting and history . Law should be capable to expand 
freedom of the people and the legal order can weigh with utmost equal 
care to provide the underpinning of the highly inequit able social order. 
Judicial review must be exercised with insight into so cial values to 
supplement the changing social needs. The existing soc ial inequalities or 
imbalances are required to be removed readjusting the social order 
through rule of law . In that case, the need for protection of right to take  
water, under the Civil Rights Protection Act, and the nece ssity to uphold 
the constitutional mandate of abolishing untouchabilit y and its practice 
in any form was emphasised. 
  xxx   xxx   xxx 
21. The Constitution through its Preamble, Fundamental  Rights and 
Directive Principles created a secular State based on  the principle of 
equality and non-discrimination, striking a balance between the rights of 
the individuals and the duty and commitment of the State to  establish an 
egalitarian social order. Dr K.M. Munshi contended on  the floor of the 
Constituent Assembly that “we want to divorce religion  from personal 
law, from what may be called social relations, or fro m the rights of 
parties as regards inheritance or succession. What ha ve these things got 
to do with religion, I fail to understand? We are in a  stage where we must 
unify and consolidate the nation by every means withou t interfering with 
religious practices . If, however, in the past, religious practices have been 
so construed as to cover the whole field of life, we h ave reached a point 
when we must put our foot down and say that these matters  are not 
religion, they are purely matters for secular legisla tion. Religion must be 
restricted to spheres which legitimately appertain to re ligion, and the rest 
of life must be regulated, unified and modified in su ch a manner that we 
may evolve, as early as possible, a strong and conso lidated nation ” [Vide: 
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. VII, pp. 356-58]. 
  xxx   xxx   xxx 
26. Human rights are derived from the dignity and w orth inherent in the 
human person. Human rights and fundamental freedoms h ave been 
reiterated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rig hts . Democracy, 
development and respect for human rights and fundamenta l freedoms 
are interdependent and have mutual reinforcement. The h uman rights 
for women, including girl child are, therefore, inal ienable, integral and an 
indivisible part of universal human rights . The full development of 
personality and fundamental freedoms and equal partic ipation by women 
in political, social, economic and cultural life are  concomitants for 232 national development, social and family stability and growth — cultural, 
social and economical. All forms of discrimination on grounds of gender 
is violative of fundamental freedoms and human rights . Convention for 
Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Wom en (for short, 
“CEDAW”) was ratified by the UNO on 18-12-1979 and the  Government 
of India had ratified as an active participant on 19-6- 1993 acceded to 
CEDAW and reiterated that discrimination against women violates the 
principles of equality of rights and respect for huma n dignity and it is an 
obstacle to the participation on equal terms with men in the political, 
social, economic and cultural life of their country; i t hampers the growth 
of the personality from society and family, making m ore difficult for the 
full development of potentialities of women in the servi ce of the respective 
countries and of humanity.” 
 
Reference was also made to the decision of this Court in the John 
Vallamattom case 9, wherefrom learned counsel for the petitioner highlig hted 
the following observations: 
“42. Article 25 merely protects the freedom to practise rituals and 
ceremonies etc. which are only the integral parts of t he religion. Article 
25 of the Constitution of India will, therefore, not have any application in 
the instant case . 
  xxx  xxx  xxx 
44. Before I part with the case, I would like to state that Article 44 
provides that the State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a 
uniform civil code throughout the territory of India . The aforesaid 
provision is based on the premise that there is no nece ssary connection 
between religious and personal law in a civilized s ociety. Article 25 of the 
Constitution confers freedom of conscience and free profession, practice 
and propagation of religion. The aforesaid two prov isions viz. Articles 25 
and 44 show that the former guarantees religious freed om whereas the 
latter divests religion from social relations and perso nal law. It is no 
matter of doubt that marriage, succession and the like  matters of a 
secular character cannot be brought within the guarante e enshrined 
under Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution. Any leg islation which 
brings succession and the like matters of secular char acter within the 
ambit of Articles 25 and 26 is a suspect legislation, although it is 
doubtful whether the American doctrine of suspect legis lation is followed 
in this country . In Sarla Mudgal v. Union of India (1995) 3 SCC 63 5 it 
was held that marriage, succession and like matters of  secular character 
cannot be brought within the guarantee enshrined under  Articles 25 and 
26 of the Constitution. It is a matter of regret that Artic le 44 of the 
Constitution has not been given effect to. Parliament is  still to step in for 
framing a common civil code in the country. A common civil code will 233 help the cause of national integration by removing the contradictions 
based on ideologies .” 
 
Last of all, our attention was drawn to the Masilamani  Mudaliar case 16, 
wherefrom reliance was placed on the following: 
“15. It is seen that if after the Constitution came into f orce, the right to 
equality and dignity of person enshrined in the Pre amble of the 
Constitution, Fundamental Rights and Directive Principl es which are a 
trinity intended to remove discrimination or disabilit y on grounds only of 
social status or gender, removed the pre-existing imped iments that stood 
in the way of female or weaker segments of the societ y . In S.R. 
Bommai v. Union of India (1994) 3 SCC 1 this Court he ld that the 
Preamble is part of the basic structure of the Constituti on. Handicaps 
should be removed only under rule of law to enliven  the trinity of justice, 
equality and liberty with dignity of person . The basic structure permeates 
equality of status and opportunity. The personal laws conferring inferior 
status on women is anathema to equality. Personal laws are derived not 
from the Constitution but from the religious scripture s. The laws thus 
derived must be consistent with the Constitution lest they become void 
under Article 13 if they violate fundamental rights. Ri ght to equality is a 
fundamental right. Parliament, therefore, has enacted Section 14 to 
remove pre-existing disabilities fastened on the Hin du female limiting her 
right to property without full ownership thereof. The discrimination is 
sought to be remedied by Section 14(1) enlarging the scope of acquisition 
of the property by a Hindu female appending an expla nation with it .” 
 
168. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the  submissions 
noticed in the foregoing paragraphs.  We are of the v iew, that in the 
determination of the matter canvassed, the true purport and substance of 
Articles 25 and 44  have to be understood.  We shall n ow endeavour to deal 
with the above provisions. 
169. During the course of hearing our attention has be en drawn to the 
Constituent Assembly debates, with reference to Article 25 (-draft Article 
19).  The debates reveal that the members of the Consti tuent Assembly 
understood a clear distinction between ‘personal law’  and the ‘civil code’.  
‘Personal law’ was understood as based on the practic es of members of 234 communities.  It was to be limited to the community itsel f, and would not 
affect members of other communities.  The ‘civil code ’ on the other hand, 
had an unlimited reach.  The ‘civil code’ was unders tood to apply to every 
citizen of the land, to whatever community he may belon g.  So far as 
‘personal law’ is concerned, it was recognized as ar ising out of, practices 
followed by members of particular communities, over the ages.  The only 
member of the Assembly, who made a presentation during  the debates (-
Mohammed Ismail Sahib) stated, “This practice of foll owing ‘personal law’ 
has been there amongst the people for ages.  What we w ant under this 
amendment is that that practice should not be disturbed now  and I want 
only the continuance of a practice that has been going on among the people 
for ages past …..  Under this amendment what I want this House to accept 
is that when we speak of the State doing anything with re ference to the 
secular aspect of religion, the question of personal law shall not be brought 
in and it shall not be affected. ….. The question of professions, practicing 
and propagating one’s faith is a right which the huma n being had from the 
very beginning of time and that has been recognized a s an inalienable right 
of every human being, not only in this land, but the wo rld over and I think 
that nothing should be done to affect that right of man a s a human being.  
That part of the article as it stands is properly worded  and it should stand 
as it is.”  It is apparent, that the position expressed in  the Sarla Mudgal 
case 40 , clearly reiterates the above exposition during the C onstituent 
Assembly debates.  The response to the above statement (-of Mohammed 
Ismail Sahib), was delivered by Laksnmikanta Mitra, who observed, “This 235 article 19 of the Draft Constitution confers on all pers ons the right to 
profess, practise and propagate any religion they lik e but this right has 
been circumscribed by certain conditions which the Sta te would be free to 
impose in the interests of public morality, public or der and public health 
and also in so far as the right conferred here does n ot conflict in any way 
with the other provisions elaborated under this part of  the Constitution. 
Some of my Friends argued that this right ought not to be  permitted in this 
Draft Constitution for the simple reason that we have dec lared time and 
again that this is going to be a secular State and as such practice of religion 
should not be permitted as a fundamental right. It has be en further argued 
that by conferring the additional right to propagate a par ticular faith or 
religion the door is opened for all manner of troubl es and conflicts which 
would eventually paralyse the normal life of the State.  We would say at once 
that this conception of a secular State is wholly wrong. By secular State, as 
we understand it, is meant that the State is not going to make any 
discrimination whatsoever on the ground of religion o r community against 
any person professing any particular form of religio us faith. This means in 
essence that no particular religion in the State will re ceive any State 
patronage whatsoever. The State is not going to establish , patronise or 
endow any particular religion to the exclusion of or in preference to others 
and that no citizen in the State will have any prefere ntial treatment or will 
be discriminated against simply on the ground that he professed a 
particular form of religion. ….. At the same time we mu st be very careful to 
see that this land of ours we do not deny to anybody the  right not only to 236 profess or practise but also to propagate any particular  religion. 
…..Therefore I feel that the Constitution has rightly pr ovided for this not 
only as a right but also as a fundamental right. In the exercise of this 
fundamental right every community inhabiting this State  professing any 
religion will have equal right and equal facilities to do whatever it likes in 
accordance with its religion provided it does not cla sh with the conditions 
laid down here.” 
170. The debates in the Constituent Assembly with ref erence to Article 
25, leave no room for any doubt, that the framers of th e Constitution were 
firm in making ‘personal law’ a part of the fundamenta l rights.  With the 
liberty to the State to provide for social reform.  It i s also necessary to notice 
at this stage, that the judgment in the Valsamma Paul case20 , cannot be the 
basis for consideration in the present controversy, bec ause it did not deal 
with issues arising out of ‘personal law’ which enjo y a constitutional 
protection.  What also needs to be recorded is, that the j udgment in the 
John Vallamattom case 9, expresses that the matters of the nature, need to 
be dealt with through legislation, and as such, the vie w expressed in the 
above judgment cannot be of any assistance to further th e petitioners’ 
cause. 
171. The debates of the Constituent Assembly with refer ence to Article 
44, are also relevant. We may refer to draft Article 25  (which came to be 
enacted as Article 44).  The Article requires the State  to endeavour to secure 
a uniform ‘civil code’.  A member who debated the pr ovision during the 
deliberations of the Constituent Assembly, canvassed th at groups and 237 sections of religious denominations be given the righ t to adhere to their own 
personal law (-Mohamed Ismail Sahib), as it was felt,  that interference in 
‘personal law’ would amount to interfering with “…the  way of life and 
religion of the people…”.  It was also argued (-by Na ziruddin Ahmad), that 
what was extended as a protection through Article 25 (-d raft Article 19), 
namely, “…all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the 
right to freely profess, practice and propagate religi on…”, was sought to be 
taken away via Article 44.  The position highlighted, w as that all religious 
practices should remain, beyond the purview of law.  One member of the 
Constituent Assembly (-Mahbood Ali Baig Sahib Bahadur ), said that the 
uniform civil code, in the Article, should not includ e ‘personal law’.  He 
refuted the suggestions of M.Ananthasayanam Ayyangar b y asserting, that 
practices of Muslims, in vogue for 1350 years could not be altered.   
Another member – Pocker Sahib Bahadur, supported the suggestion of 
Mohamed Ismail Sahib.  The question he posed was “…w hether by the 
freedom we have obtained for this country, are we goin g to give up the 
freedom of conscience and that freedom of religion pr actices and that 
freedom of following ones own personal law…”  But al l these submissions 
were rejected.  All this leads to the clear understandi ng, that the 
Constitution requires the State to provide for a unifor m civil code, to remedy 
and assuage, the maladies expressed in the submissio ns advanced by the 
learned Attorney General.   
172. There can be no doubt, that the ‘personal law’ ha s been elevated to 
the stature of a fundamental right in the Constitution.  And as such, 238 ‘personal law’ is enforceable as it is.  All constitut ional Courts, are the 
constitutional guardians of all the Fundamental Rights (– included in Part 
III of the Constitution).  It is therefore the constituti onal duty of all Courts 
to protect, preserve and enforce, all fundamental right s, and not the other 
way around.  It is judicially unthinkable for a Cour t, to accept any prayer to 
declare as unconstitutional (-or unacceptable in law), for any reason or 
logic, what the Constitution declares as a fundamental right.  Because, in 
accepting the prayer(s), this Court would be denying the rights expressly 
protected under Article 25.  
173. It is not possible to adopt concepts emerging from the American 
Constitution, over the provisions of the Indian Consti tution. It is therefore 
not possible to refer to substantive due process, as the basis of the decision 
of the present controversy, when there are express prov isions provided for, 
on the matter in hand, under the Indian  Constitution.   It is also not 
possible, to read into the Constitution, what the Const ituent Assembly 
consciously and thoughtfully excluded (-or, to overloo k provisions expressly 
incorporated).  One cannot make a reference to decisi ons of the U.S. 
Supreme Court, though there would be no difficulty o f their being taken into 
consideration for persuasive effect, in support of a cause, in consonance 
with the provisions of the Constitution of India and the  laws.  In fact, this 
Court is bound by the judgments of the Supreme Court of  India, which in 
terms of Article 141 of the Constitution, are binding declarations of law. 
174. The prayer made to this Court by those representin g the petitioners’ 
cause, on the ground that the practice of ‘talaq-e-bid dat’ is violative of the 239 concept of constitutional morality cannot be acceded to,  and is accordingly 
declined. 
VIII. Reforms to ‘personal law’ in India:  
175. In our consideration, it is also necessary to bri efly detail legislation 
in India with regard to matters strictly pertaining to ‘pe rsonal law’, and 
particularly to the issues of marriage and divorce, i.e., matters strictly 
within the confines of ‘personal law’.  
176(i). Reference in this context may first of all be made to the Divorce Act, 
1869.  The Statement of objects and reasons of the Bill , delineates the 
purpose that was sought to be achieved through the enactm ent.  Relevant 
part thereof, is reproduced hereunder:- 
“Statement of objects and reasons 
The object of Indian Divorce Bill is to place the M atrimonial Law 
administered by the High Courts, in the exercise of  their original 
jurisdiction, on the same footing as the Matrimonia l Law administered 
by the court for Divorce and Matrimonial Causes in England . 
The 9th Section of the Act of Parliament for establ ishing High Courts of 
Judicature in India (24 and 25 Vic., C.104) provide s that the High Courts 
shall exercise such Matrimonial Jurisdiction as Her  Majesty by Letters 
Patent shall grant and direct. Under the authority thus conferred by 
Parliament, the 35th Section of the Letters Patent,  constituting the High 
Courts of Judicature, provides as follows:—  
"And we do further ordain that the said High Court of Judicature at 
Fort William in Bengal shall have jurisdiction in m atters matrimonial 
between our subjects professing the Christian relig ion, and that such 
jurisdiction shall extend to the local limits withi n which the Supreme 
Court now has Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction . Provided always that nothing 
herein contained shall be held to interfere with th e exercise of any 
Jurisdiction in matters matrimonial by any court no t established by 
Royal Charter within the said Presidency lawfully p ossessed thereof."  
In the Despatch of the Secretary of State transmitt ing the Letters Patent 
the 33rd and 34th paragraphs are to the following e ffect:— 
“33. Her Majesty's Government are desirous of placi ng the Christian 
subjects of the Crown within the Presidency in the same position under 
the High Court, as to matters matrimonial in genera l as they now are 
under the Supreme Court, and this they believe to b e effected by Clause 
35 of the Charter. But they consider it expedient t hat the High Court 240 should possess, in addition, the power of decreeing  divorce which the 
Supreme Court does not possess, in other words, tha t the High Court 
should have the same jurisdiction as the Court for Divorce and 
Matrimonial Causes in England , established in virtue of the Act 20 and 
21 Vic., C. 85, and in regard to which further prov isions were made by 22 
and 23 Vic., C.61, and 23 and 24 Vic., C.144. The Act of Parliament for 
establishing the High Courts, however, does not purp ort to give to the 
Crown the power of importing into the Charter all the provisions of the 
Divorce Court Act, and some of them, the Crown clearly  could not so 
import, such, for instance, as those which prescribe t he period of re-
marriage, and those which exempt from punishment clerg ymen refusing 
to re-marry adulterers. All these are, in truth, matters  for Indian 
legislation , and I request that you will immediately take the subject into 
your consideration, and introduce into your Council  a Bill for conferring 
upon the High Court, the jurisdiction and powers of  the Divorce Court in 
England, one of the provisions of which should be t o give an appeal to the 
Privy Council in those cases in which the Divorce C ourt Act gives an appeal 
to the House of Lords. 
34. The objects of the provision at the end of Claus e 35 is to obviate any 
doubt that may possibly arise as to whether, by vesting  the High Court 
with the powers of the Court for Divorce and Matrimonia l Causes in 
England, it was intended to take away from the Cour ts within Divisions of 
the Presidency, not established by Royal Charter, a ny jurisdiction which 
they might have in matters matrimonial, as for instance i n a suit for 
alimony between Armenians or Native Christians. Wit h any such 
jurisdiction it is not intended to interfere." 
In addition to the Act of Parliament mentioned by t he Secretary of State as 
regulating the jurisdiction of the England Divorce Court the Statute 25 and 
26 Vic., Ch.81 has been passed in the year just exp ired (1862). The object of 
this statute is to render perpetual 23 and 24 Vic.,  Ch. 144 the duration of 
which had been originally limited to two years. 
The draft of a Bill has been prepared to give effec t to the Secretary of State’s 
instructions, but some variations from the English Statutes in respect of 
Procedure have been adopted. 
With a view to uniformity in practice in the several br anches of 
jurisdiction, the Bill provides that the Procedure of  the Code of Civil 
Procedure shall be followed, instead of the Rules o f Her Majesty's Court for 
Divorce and Matrimonial Causes in England, and it o mits the provision in 
20 and 21 Vic., Ch. 85 respecting the occasional tr ial of questions of fact by 
juries.” 
 
(ii) The Divorce Act, 1869 provided for the grounds f or dissolution of 
marriage in Section 10 thereof.  The same is extracted  hereunder:- 
“10.Grounds for dissolution of marriage .-(1) Any marriage solemnized, 
whether before or after the commencement of the Indian  Divorce 
(Amendment) Act, 2001, may, on a petition presented to the District 241 Court either by the husband or the wife, be dissolved o n the ground that 
since the solemnization of the marriage, the respondent — 
(i) has committed adultery ; or 
(ii) has ceased to be Christian  by conversion to another religion; or 
(iii) has been incurably of unsound  mind for a continuous period of not 
less than two years immediately preceding the presenta tion of the 
petition; or 
(iv) has, for a period of not less than two years imm ediately preceding the 
presentation of the petition, been suffering from a viru lent and incurable 
form of leprosy ; or 
(v) has, for a period of not less than two years imme diately preceding the 
presentation of the petition, been suffering from venere al disease in a 
communicable form ; or 
(vi) has not been heard of as being alive  for a period of seven years or 
more by those persons who would naturally have heard  of the 
respondent if the respondent had been alive; or 
(vii) has wilfully refused to consummate the marriage  and the marriage 
has not therefore been consummated; or 
(viii) has failed to comply with a decree for restituti on of conjugal rights  
for a period of two years or upwards after the passin g of the decree 
against the respondent; or 
(ix) has deserted the petitioner  for at least two years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition; or 
(x) has treated the petitioner with such cruelty  as to cause a reasonable 
apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that it would be harmful or 
injurious for the petitioner to live with the respondent. 
(2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissoluti on of her marriage 
on the ground that the husband has, since the solemniza tion of the 
marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality. ” 
 
(iii) In addition to the above, consequent upon a fur ther amendment, 
Section 10A was added thereto, to provide for dissolutio n of marriage by 
consent.  What is sought to be highlighted is, that it req uired legislation to 
provide for divorce amongst the followers of the Chris tian faith in India.  
The instant legislation provided for grounds on which Christian husbands 
and wives could obtain divorce. 
177 (i). Parsis in India, are the followers of the Ir anian prophet Zoroaster.  
The Parsis, are stated to have migrated from Iran to In dia, to avoid religious 
persecution by the Muslims.  Parsis in India were gov erned in the matter of 242 marriage and divorce by their ‘personal law’.  For th e first time in 1865, the 
Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act was passed.  The same  was substituted by 
the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 after substan tial amendments to 
the original enactment.  The statement of objects and rea sons of the Parsi 
Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 clearly demonstrates the  above position.  
The same is reproduced below:- 
“Statement of objects and reasons 
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act at present in force  was passed in 
1865. Since then circumstances have greatly altered and  to some extent 
there has also been a change in the sentiments and view s of the Parsi 
community . Hence a necessity for some change in the law has b een felt 
for years. The Parsi Central Association took up the q uestion in 1923 
and appointed a Sub-Committee to suggest amendments . The Sub-
Committee submitted a report which the Association got pri nted and 
circulated for opinion to most other Parsi Associatio ns as well as 
prominent members of the community both in Bombay and outside. 
Many suggestions were made, and among them by the Trus tees of the 
Bombay Parsi Panchayat who had the advantage of seeing  the 
suggestions of others. The Central Association adopted the suggestions of 
the Panchayat Trustees and reprinted the whole and aga in circulated it. 
Fresh suggestions were thereupon made in the press, on  the platform, by 
associations and individuals. These were fully cons idered by the Trustees 
as well as the Association and the present draft is the result . On the 
whole it represents, the views of the great majority of  the community, 
and has been approved by leading Parsis like Sir Di nshaw E. Wacha and 
the late Rt. Hon. Sir Dinshaw F. Mulla.” 
 
(ii) Chapter II of the aforesaid enactment, deals with t he subject of 
marriages between Parsis.  Section 3 provides for re quisites of a valid Parsi 
marriage.  Section 6 denotes a requirement of a certif icate of marriage.  
Chapter IV provides for a variety of matrimonial suit s, wherein Section 30 
deals with suits for nullity.  Section 31 deals with suits for dissolution of 
marriage.  The grounds for divorce are set out in Sec tion 32, which is 
reproduced herein below:- 243 “32.Grounds for divorce.-  Any married person may su e for divorce on 
any one or more of the following  grounds, namely:— 
  (a) that the marriage has not been consummated within one year after its 
solemnization owing to the wilful refusal of the defe ndant to consummate 
it; 
(b) that the defendant at the time of the marriage was of unsound mind  
and has been habitually so up to the date of the suit: 
Provided that divorce shall not be granted on this gro und, unless the 
plaintiff; (1) was ignorant of the fact  at the time of the marriage, and (2) 
has filed the suit within three years from the date of th e marriage; 
(bb) that the defendant has been incurable of the unso und mind for a 
period of two years or upwards immediately precedin g the filing of the 
suit or has been suffering continuously or intermitten tly from mental 
disorder of such kind and to such an extent that the pla intiff cannot 
reasonable be expected to live with the defendant. 
Explanation.- In this clause,- 
(a)  the expression “mental disorder” means mental ill ness, arrested or 
incomplete development of mind, psychopathic disorder  or any other 
disorder or disability of mind and includes schizop hrenia; 
(b) the expression “psychopathic disorder” means a persistent disorder of 
disability of mind (whether or not including subnorma lity of intelligence) 
which results in abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct 
on the part of the defendant, and whether or not it requi res or is 
susceptible to medical treatment; 
(c) that the defendant was at the time of marriage pregn ant by some 
person other than the plaintiff : 
Provided that divorce shall not be granted on this groun d, unless: (1) the 
plaintiff was at the time of the marriage ignorant of th e fact alleged, (2) 
the suit has been filed within two years of the date of marriage, and (3) 
marital intercourse has not taken place after the plainti ff came to know 
of the fact; 
(d)   that the defendant has since the marriage committe d adultery or 
fornication or bigamy or rape or an unnatural offen ce : 
Provided that divorce shall not be granted on this grou nd if the suit has 
been filed more than two years after the plaintiff cam e to know of the 
fact; 
(dd) that the defendant has since the solemnization of th e marriage 
treated the plaintiff with cruelty or has behaved in su ch a way as to 
render it in the judgment of the Court improper to compel  the plaintiff to 
live with the defendant: 
Provided that in every suit for divorce on this ground it shall be in the 
discretion of the Court whether it should grant a decree for divorce or for 
judicial separation only; 
(e) that the defendant has since the marriage voluntarily  caused grievous 
hurt to the plaintiff or has infected the plaintiff wi th venereal disease or, 
where the defendant is the husband, has compelled the wife to submit 
herself to prostitution : 244 Provided that divorce shall not be granted on this grou nd if the suit has 
been filed more than two years (i) after the inflicti on of the grievous hurt, 
or (ii) after the plaintiff came to know of the infectio n, or (iii) after the last 
act of compulsory prostitution; 
(f)  that the defendant is undergoing a sentence of im prisonment for 
seven years  or more for an offence as defined in the Indian Pen al Code 
(45 of 1860): 
Provided that divorce shall not be granted on this gro und, unless the 
defendant has prior to the filing of the suit undergone at least one year's 
imprisonment out of the said period; 
(g)  that the defendant has deserted the plaintiff  for at least two years; 
(h) that an order has been passed against the defenda nt by a Magistrate 
awarding separate maintenance to the plaintiff, and the parties have not 
had marital intercourse for one year or more since su ch decree or order ; 
(j) that the defendant has ceased to be a Parsi by conv ersion to another 
religion ; 
Provided that divorce shall not be granted on this grou nd if the suit has 
been filed more than two years after the  plaintiff came to know of the 
fact. 
 
(iii) In addition to the above, Section 32B introduce d by way of an 
amendment, provides for divorce by mutual consent, an d Section 34 
provides for suits for judicial separation, and  Secti on 36 provides for suits 
for restitution of conjugal rights. 
178(i). The Special Marriage Act, 1872 provided for inter-faith marriages.  
The same came to be replaced by the Special Marriage  Act, 1954.  The 
statement of objects and reasons thereof is reproduced hereunder:- 
“Statement of objects and reasons 
This Bill revises and seeks to replace the Special Ma rriage Act of 1872 so 
as to provide a special form of marriage which can b e taken advantage of 
by any person in India and by all Indian nationals in foreign countries 
irrespective of the faith which either party to the mar riage may profess. 
The parties may observe any ceremonies for the solemn ization of their 
marriage, but certain formalities are prescribed befo re the marriage can 
be registered by the Marriage Officers . For the benefit of Indian citizens 
abroad, the Bill provides for the appointment of Diplom atic and Consular 
Officers as Marriage Officers for solemnizing and r egistering marriages 
between citizens of India in a foreign country. 
2. Provision is also sought to be made for permitting persons who are 
already married under other forms of marriage to regi ster their marriages 
under this Act and thereby avail themselves of these pro visions . 245 3. The bill is drafted generally on the lines of the existing Special 
Marriage Act of 1872 and the notes on clauses attached hereto explain 
some of the changes made in the Bill in greater detail .” 
 
(ii)  The subject of solemnization of special marriag es, is provided for in 
Section 4 of the above enactment.  Section 4 lays down th e conditions 
related to solemnization of special marriages, which requires a notice of the 
parties intending to get married, the procedure and con ditions whereof are 
contained in Section 5.  The provisions of the enactmen t require, entering a 
copy of the notice in the ‘marriage notice book’, and th e publication thereof 
by affixation of the copy thereof to some conspicuous p lace in the office of 
marriage officer.  Objections to the contemplated marria ge can be preferred 
under Section 7.  The manner in which the objections have to be dealt with 
is provided for in Sections 8, 9 and 10.  Consequent upon the completion of 
the formalities postulated in Chapter II of the enactment,  parties are 
permitted to solemnize their marriage, for which the ma rriage officer shall 
issue a certificate of marriage, that would be consider ed as conclusive 
evidence of the fact that parties are married under the provisions of the 
Special Marriages Act, 1954.   
(iii) Parties who have entered into a matrimonial alli ance by way of 
ceremonies of marriage conducted under different faith s, and have been 
living together, are also permitted to register their mar riage under the 
Special Marriage Act, 1954, under Section 15 thereof.    
(iv) Chapter IV of the enactment deals with consequences  of marriage 
under the Act.  Chapter V provides the remedies of resti tution of conjugal 
rights and judicial separation.  Chapter VI defines v oid and voidable 246 marriages, and provides for nullity of marriage and  divorce.  Section 27 
included in Chapter VI incorporates the grounds for d ivorce, which are 
extracted hereunder:- 
“27.Divorce.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act a nd to the rules 
made thereunder, a petition for divorce may be present ed to the district 
court either by the husband or the wife on the ground  that the 
respondent—  
(a) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had v oluntary sexual 
intercourse with any person other than his or her spous e ; or 
(b) has deserted the petitioner  for a continuous period of not less than 
two years immediately preceding the presentation of the  petition; or 
(c) is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment  for seven years or more for 
an offence as defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 o f 1860); 
(d) has since the solemnization of the marriage treate d the petitioner with 
cruelty ; or  
(e)has been incurably of unsound mind , or has been suffering 
continuously or intermittently from mental disorder  of such a kind and 
to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to 
live with the respondent.  
Explanation.—In this clause,— 
(a) the expression “mental disorder” means mental illn ess, arrested or 
incomplete development of mind, psychopathic disorder  or any other 
disorder or disability of mind and includes schizop hrenia; 
(b) the expression “psychopathic disorder” means a pe rsistent disorder or 
disability of mind (whether or not including sub-nor mality of intelligence) 
which results in abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct 
on the part of the respondent, and whether or not it requ ires or is 
susceptible to medical treatment; or 
(f) has been suffering from venereal disease in a c ommunicable form; 
or 
(g)has been suffering from leprosy, the disease not h aving been contacted 
from the petitioner; or 
(h)has not been heard of as being alive for a period  of seven years or 
more by those persons who would naturally have heard  of the 
respondent if the respondent had been alive;  
Explanation.—In this sub-section, the expression “dese rtion” means 
desertion of the petitioner by the other party to the marr iage without 
reasonable cause and without the consent or against the w ish of such 
party, and includes the wilful neglect of the petitioner  by the other party 
to the marriage, and its grammatical variations and co gnate expressions 
shall be construed accordingly;  
(1A)A wife may also present a petition for divorce to t he district court on 
the ground,— 
(i) that her husband has, since the solemnization of the  marriage, been 
guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality ; 247 (ii)that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu Adopti ons and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 (78 of 1956), or in a proceedin g under section 
125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 19 74) (or under the 
corresponding section 488 of the Code of Criminal Pro cedure, 1898) (5 of 
1898), a decree or order, as the case may be, has be en passed against 
the husband awarding maintenance to the wife notwithstan ding that she 
was living apart  and that since the passing of such decree or order, 
cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed f or one year or 
upwards.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rule s made 
thereunder, either party to a marriage, whether solemn ized before or 
after the commencement of the Special Marriage (Amendm ent) Act, 1970 
(29 of 1970), may present a petition for divorce to the district court on 
the ground— 
(i) that there has been no resumption of cohabitation as between the 
parties to the marriage for a period of one year or up wards  after the 
passing of a decree for judicial separation in a pro ceeding to which they 
were parties; or 
(ii)that there has been no restitution of conjugal righ ts as between the 
parties  to the marriage for a period of one year or upwards after the 
passing of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights  in a proceeding to 
which they were parties.” 
 
In addition to the above, Section 28 provides for divor ce by mutual consent. 
179. The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 followed the Spec ial Marriage Act, 
1954.  It was enacted on account of uncertainty of law related to foreign 
marriages.  The statement of objects and reasons of t he Foreign Marriage 
Act, 1969 expresses the holistic view, which led to the  passing of the 
legislation.  The same is reproduced below:- 
“Statement of objects and reasons 
This Bill seeks to implement the Twenty-third Report of  the Law 
Commission on the law relating to foreign marriages. There is, at present 
considerable uncertainty as to the law on the subject , as the existing 
legislation touches only the fringes of the subject an d the matter is 
governed by principles of private international law w hich are by no 
means well-settled, and which cannot readily be applie d to a country 
such as ours in which different marriage laws apply to different 
communities. The Special Marriage Act, 1954 sought to r emove the 
uncertainty to some extent by providing that marriages a broad between 
citizens of India who are domiciled in India might be  solemnized under it . 
In the course of the debates in relation to that Act in P arliament, it was 
urged that a provision should be made for marriages a broad where one of 248 the parties alone is an Indian citizen. In this context,  an assurance was 
given that Government would, after careful considerati on, introduce 
comprehensive legislation on the subject of foreign marriages. The 
present Bill is the outcome of that assurance . 
(2)  The Bill is modelled on the Special Marriage Ac t, 1954, and the 
existing English and Australian Legislation on the sub ject of foreign 
marriages, subject to certain important modifications re ndered necessary 
by the peculiar conditions obtaining in our country. 
The following are the salient features of the Bill:— 
(i) It provides for an enabling form of marriage mo re or less on the same 
lines as the Special Marriage Act, 1954 which can be availed of outside 
India where one of the parties to the marriage is an In dian citizen ; the 
form of marriage thus provided being not in supersess ion of, but only in 
addition to or as an alternative to, any other form that might be 
permissible to the parties. 
(ii) It seeks to lay down certain rules in respect of c apacity of parties and 
conditions of validity of marriage and also provides for registration of 
marriage on lines similar to those in the Special Ma rriage Act, 1954. 
(iii) The provisions of the Special Marriage Act, 195 4, in regard to 
matrimonial reliefs are sought to be made applicable,  with suitable 
modifications, not only to marriages solemnized or re gistered under the 
proposed legislation, but also to other marriages sole mnized abroad to  
which a citizen of India is a party .” 
 
(ii) Chapter II of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 prov ides for the 
solemnization of the foreign marriages.  Section 4 con tained therein 
expresses the conditions relating to solemnization of fo reign marriages.  The 
notice of an intended marriage is provided for in Se ction 5.  The 
incorporation of the said marriage in the ‘marriage n otice book’ is contained 
in Section 6.  The publication of such notice is provi ded for in Section 7.  
Objections to the proposed marriage can be filed und er Section 8.  
Consequent upon the fulfillment of the conditions and d etermination by the 
marriage officer, the place and form of solemnization  of marriage are 
detailed in Section 13, whereupon, the marriage office r is required to enter a 
certificate of marriage, which is accepted as evidence  of the fact that the 
marriage between the parties had been solemnized.  Ch apter III mandates 249 the registration of foreign marriages, solemnized unde r other laws.  Section 
17 provides for necessary requirements therefor.   
(v) It would be relevant to mention, that matrimonial reli efs as are 
provided for under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (- which are contained in 
Chapters IV, V and VI thereof) have been adopted for m arriages registered 
under the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 (-see paragraph 179 above). 
180. Muslims are followers of Islam.  Muslims consi der the Quran their 
holy book.  For their personal relations, they follow the Muslim ‘personal 
law’ – ‘Shariat’.  The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat)  Application Act, 1937, 
as already noticed above provided, “the rule of deci sion” in matters 
pertaining, inter alia, to marriage, dissolution of mar riage including talaq, 
ila, zihar, lian, khula and mubaraat would be the Mus lim ‘personal law’ – 
‘Shariat’, and not, any custom or usage to the contrary.   It is therefore, that 
by a statutory intervention, customs and usages in conf lict with Muslim 
‘personal law’, were done away with, in connection wi th ‘personal law’ 
matters, in relation to Muslims.  The Dissolution of Mu slim Marriages Act, 
1939 provided, grounds for dissolution of marriage to  Muslim women, 
under Section 2 of the above enactment.  Details with ref erence to 1937 and 
1939 legislations, have already been narrated, in P art IV – Legislation in 
India, in the field of Muslim ‘personal law’.  Refe rence may, therefore, be 
made to Part IV above. 
181 (i).  The law of marriage and divorce amongst Hi ndus, has had a 
chequered history.  A marriage, according to Hindu la w, is a holy 
sacrament, and not a contract (as is the case of Muslims ).  Originally there 250 were eight forms of Hindu marriages, four of which w ere considered regular 
– and the rest irregular.  The choice of marriage, wa s limited only to one’s 
own religion and caste.  Polygamy was permitted among st Hindus, but not 
polyandry.   Widow marriage was also not permitted.  Legislation in respect 
of Hindu marriages commenced in 1829 when Sati was a bolished by law.  
In 1856, Hindu Widows’ Remarriage Act, legalized the marriage of Hindu 
widows.  In 1860, the Indian Penal Code made polygam y a criminal offence.  
In 1866, Native Converts Marriage Dissolution Act facil itated divorce for 
Hindus, who had adopted the Christian faith.  In 1872, Special Marriage Act 
was enacted, but it excluded Hindus.  In 1869, the Ind ian Divorce Act was 
passed, but this too remained inapplicable to Hindus.  In 1909, the Anand 
Marriage Act legalized marriages amongst Sikhs (calle d – Anand).  In 1923, 
by an amendment to the Special Marriage Act, inter-relig ious civil marriages 
between Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and Jains were lega lized.  In 1937, the 
Arya Marriage Validation Act legalized the inter-cast e marriages, and 
marriages with converts to Hinduism, among the follower s of Arya Samaj.  
In 1949, Hindu Marriages Validity Act legalized int er-religious marriages.   
(ii) The Hindu Marriage Act, was passed in 1955.  Se ction 5 of the 
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, provides for the conditions  of a valid Hindu 
marriage.  Section 7 incorporates the ceremonies requi red for a Hindu 
marriage.  Section 8 provides for the requirement of r egistration of Hindu 
marriages.  The remedies of restitution of conjugal ri ghts and judicial 
separation, are provided for in Sections 9 and 10 res pectively.  Provisions 
related to nullity of marriages and divorce are conta ined in Sections 11 and 251 12.  The grounds of divorce have been expressed in Section 13, which is 
reproduced below:- 
“13.Divorce.- (1) Any marriage solemnized, whether b efore or after the 
commencement of this Act, may, on a petition presented b y either the 
husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of div orce on the ground 
that the other party-  
(i) has, after the solemnization of the marriage had v oluntary sexual 
intercourse with any person other than his or her spous e ; or  
(ia) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, trea ted the petitioner 
with cruelty ; or  
(ib) has deserted the petitioner  for a continuous period of not less than 
two years immediately preceding the presentation of the  petition; or  
(ii) has ceased to be a Hindu  by conversion to another religion; or 
(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind , or has been suffering 
continuously or intermittently from mental disorder of such a kind and 
to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to 
live with the respondent.  
Explanation- In this clause,-  
(a) the expression "mental disorder" means mental illn ess, arrested or 
incomplete development of mind, psychopathic disorder  or any other 
disorder or disability of mind and include schizoph renia;  
(b) the expression "psychopathic disorder" means a pe rsistent disorder or 
disability of mind (whether or not including sub-nor mality of intelligence) 
which results in abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct 
on the part of the other party and whether or not it requi res or is 
susceptible to medical treatment; or  
(iv) has been suffering from a virulent and incurabl e form of leprosy; or  
(v) has been suffering from veneral disease in a co mmunicable form; or  
(vi) has renounced the world by entering any religiou s order; or  
(vii) has not been heard of as being alive for a per iod of seven years or 
more by those persons who would naturally have heard of it, had that 
party been alive;  
Explanation.- In this sub-section, the expression "deser tion" means the 
desertion of the petitioner by the other party to the marr iage without 
reasonable cause and without the consent or against the w ish of such 
party, and includes the willful neglect of the petitione r by the other party 
to the marriage, and its grammatical variations and co gnate expression 
shall be construed accordingly.  
(1-A) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or after the 
commencement of this Act, may also present a petition for  the 
dissolution of the marriage by a decree of divorce o n the ground-  
(i) that there has been no resumption of cohabitation a s between the 
parties to the marriage for a period of one year or up wards after the 
passing of a decree for judicial separation in a pro ceeding to which they 
were parties; or 252 (ii) that there has been no restitution of conjugal ri ghts as between the 
parties to the marriage for a period of one year or up ward after the 
passing of a decree of restitution of conjugal rights in a proceeding to 
which they were parties.  
(2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolu tion of her marriage 
by a decree of divorce on the ground-  
(i) in the case of any marriage solemnized before the  commencement of 
this Act, that the husband had married again before such  
commencement or that any other wife of the husband marr ied before 
such commencement was alive at the time of the solemniz ation of the 
marriage of the petitioner:  
Provided that in either case the other wife is alive at the time of the 
presentation of the petition; or 
(ii)that the husband has, since the solemnization of the  marriage, been 
guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality ; or  
(iii) that in a suit under Section 18 of the Hindu Adop tions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 (78 of 1956), or in a proceedin g under Section 
125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (2 of 1 974) or under 
corresponding Section 488 of the Code of Criminal Pr ocedure, 1898 (5 of 
1898), a decree  or order, as the case may be, has been passed again st 
the husband awarding maintenance to the wife notwithstan ding that she 
was living apart and that since the passing of such dec ree or order , 
cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed f or one year or 
upwards; or  
(iv) that her marriage (whether consummated or not) wa s solemnized 
before she attained the age of fifteen years and she  has repudiated the 
marriage after attaining that age but before attaining th e age of eighteen 
years.  
Explanation.- This clause applies whether the marriage  was solemnized 
before or after the commencement of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) 
Act, 1976 (68 of 1976).” 
By subsequent amendments, Section 13B was introduced, w hich provides 
for divorce by mutual consent. 
182. A perusal of the details pertaining to legislatio n in India with regard 
to matters pertaining to ‘personal law’, and particularl y to issues of 
marriage and divorce for different religious communi ties reveals, that all 
issues governed by ‘personal law’, were only altered  by way of legislation.  
There is not a singular instance of judicial interventi on, brought to our 
notice except a few judgments rendered by High Courts (-for details, refer to 253 Part-6 – Judicial pronouncements, on the subject of ‘ta laq-e-biddat’).  These 
judgments, however, attempted the interpretative course, as against an 
invasive one. The details depicted above relate to mar riage between 
Christians, Parsis, inter-faith marriages, Muslims an d Hindus, including 
Buddhists, Sikhs and Jains.  The unbroken practice du ring the pre-
independence period, and the post independence perio d – under the 
Constitution, demonstrates a clear and unambiguous cou rse, namely, 
reform in the matter of marriage and divorce (which a re integral 
components of ‘personal law’) was only introduced thr ough legislation.  
Therefore in continuation of the conclusion already r ecorded, namely, that it 
is the constitutional duty of all courts to preserve and protect ‘personal law’ 
as a fundamental right, any change thereof, has to be o nly by legislation 
under Articles 25(2) and 44, read with entry 5 of the  Concurrent List 
contained in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. 
IX. Impact of international conventions and declarations  on ‘talaq-e-      
biddat’: 
 
183. A number of learned counsel who assisted us in support of the 
petitioners’ cause were emphatic, that the practice of ‘tal aq-e-biddat’ was 
rendered impermissible, as soon as, India accepted to be a signatory to 
international conventions and declarations, with which th e practice was in 
clear conflict.  It was submitted, that continuation of the  practice of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’, sullied the image of the country internationally , as the nation was 
seen internationally as a defaulters to those conventio ns and declarations.  
It was pointed out, that by not consciously barring ‘tala q-e-biddat’, and by 254 knowingly allowing the practice to be followed, India was seen as persisting 
and propagating, what the international community consi ders abhorrent.  It 
was therefore submitted, that the practice of ‘talaq-e-bid dat’ be declared as 
unacceptable in law, since it was in conflict with inter national conventions 
and declarations. 
184. We may, in the first instance, briefly point out to the submissions 
advanced by Ms. Indira Jaising, learned senior coun sel.  She placed reliance 
on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted  by the United 
Nations General Assembly as far back as in 1948.  Sh e drew our attention 
to the preamble thereof, to emphasise, that the declaratio n recognized the 
inherent dignity of human beings as equal and inalie nable.  She highlighted 
the fact, that the declaration envisioned equal rights fo r men and women – 
both in dignity and rights. For this, she placed rel iance on Article 1 of the 
Declaration.  Referring to Article 2, she asserted, tha t there could be no 
discrimination on the basis of sex.  Learned senior counsel evoked the 
conscience of this Court, to give effect to the declara tion, to which India was 
a signatory.  This Court’s attention was also invited to the International 
Conventions on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights ( ICESCR).  The 
pointed aim whereof was to eliminate all forms of dis crimination, including 
discrimination on the basis of sex.  It was highligh ted, that the International 
Conventions Bill for Rights for Women was ratified by  189 States.  Referring 
to Article 1 thereof, it was submitted, that the objective o f the convention 
was to eradicate discrimination against women.  Havin g signed the 
aforesaid convention, it was submitted, that it was the obligation of all the 255 signatory States, to take positive and effective steps for elimination of all 
facets of discrimination against women.  It was highli ghted, that ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ was the worst form of discrimination, against women. 
185. Learned Attorney General for India strongly suppo rted the instant 
contention.  It was his pointed assertion, that the Indian State was 
obligated to adhere the principles enshrined in interna tional conventions.  It 
was highlighted, that India was a founding member of the United Nations, 
and was bound by its charter.  It was submitted, that gend er equality as a 
human right, had been provided for in various conve ntions and 
declarations.  We do not consider the necessity to repe at the submissions 
canvassed at the hands of the learned Attorney General , who painstakingly 
adverted to the same, to support his prayer, that ‘talaq-e -biddat’ was a 
practice which violated a number of conventions to whi ch India was a 
signatory.  Details in this behalf, have been record ed by us in paragraph 74, 
while recording the submissions advanced by the lear ned Attorney General.  
The same be read herein, in continuation of the submis sions briefly noticed 
above.  
186. We have considered the submissions advanced on behalf of the 
petitioners, pointedly with reference to international co nventions and 
declarations.  We have not the least doubt, that the Indi an State is 
committed to gender equality.  This is the clear mandate  of Article 14 of the 
Constitution.  India is also committed to eradicate di scrimination on the 
ground of sex.  Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitutio n, prohibit any kind of 
discrimination on the basis of sex.  There is theref ore no reason or necessity 256 while examining the issue of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, to fall  back upon international 
conventions and declarations.  The Indian Constitution itself provides for 
the same. 
187. The reason for us, not to accede to the submission s advanced at the 
behest of those who support the petitioners’ cause, with p ointed reference to 
international conventions and declarations, is based on  Article 25 of the 
Constitution, whereby ‘personal law’ of all religiou s denominations, is 
sought to be preserved.  The protection of ‘personal la ws’ of religious 
sections, is elevated to the stature of a fundamental righ t, inasmuch as 
Article 25 of the Constitution, which affords such pro tection to ‘personal 
law’ is a part of Part III (– Fundamental Rights), of t he Constitution.  It is 
therefore apparent, that whilst the Constitution of India s upports all 
conventions and declarations which call for gender eq uality, the 
Constitution preserves ‘personal law’ through which r eligious communities 
and denominations have governed themselves, as an exc eption. 
188. Our affirmation, that international conventions and  declarations are 
not binding to the extent they are in conflict with domes tic laws, can be 
traced from a series of judgments rendered by this Cou rt on the subject.  
Reference is being made to some of them herein below:  
(i)  Apparel Export Promotion Council v. A.K. Chopra41 ,  
The question that arose for consideration before this C ourt, in the instant 
case was, whether an action of a superior against a s ub-ordinate female 
employee, which is against moral sanctions can with stand the test of 
                                                 
41  (1999) 1 SCC 759 257 decency and modesty, not amounting to sexual harassm ent?  The question 
that arose was, whether the allegation that a superior tri ed to molest an 
inferior female employee at the work place, constituted  an act unbecoming 
of the conduct and behaviour expected from the superio r?  And, whether an 
inferior female employee, has recourse to a remedial  action?  While 
examining the above proposition, this Court relying on  international 
conventions and declarations arrived at the conclusion,  that the same have 
to be given effect to unless they were contrary to domes tic laws, by holding 
as under: 
“26. There is no gainsaying that each incident of sex ual harassment at 
the place of work, results in violation of the fundame ntal right to gender 
equality and the right to life and liberty — the two most precious 
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of In dia . As early as 
in 1993, at the ILO Seminar held at Manila, it was reco gnized that sexual 
harassment of women at the workplace was a form of “ge nder 
discrimination against women”. In our opinion, the contents of the 
fundamental rights guaranteed in our Constitution are of sufficient 
amplitude to encompass all facets  of gender equality, including 
prevention of sexual harassment and abuse and the cour ts are under a 
constitutional obligation to protect and preserve those f undamental 
rights . That sexual harassment of a female at the place of wo rk is 
incompatible with the dignity and honour of a female and needs to be 
eliminated and that there can be no compromise with suc h violations, 
admits of no debate. The message of international inst ruments such as 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Disc rimination Against 
Women, 1979 (“CEDAW”) and the Beijing Declaration wh ich directs all 
State parties to take appropriate measures to prevent discr imination of 
all forms against women besides taking steps to protect th e honour and 
dignity of women is loud and clear. The Internationa l Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights contains several  provisions 
particularly important for women. Article 7 recognises her right to fair 
conditions of work and reflects that women shall not be  subjected to 
sexual harassment at the place of work which may vitia te the working 
environment. These international instruments cast an obli gation on the 
Indian State to gender-sensitise its laws and the courts a re under an 
obligation to see that the message of the international  instruments is not 
allowed to be drowned . This Court has in numerous cases emphasised 
that while discussing constitutional requirements, court and counsel 
must never forget the core principle embodied in the international 258 conventions and instruments and as far as possible, gi ve effect to the 
principles contained in those international instruments.  The courts are 
under an obligation to give due regard to international  conventions and 
norms for construing domestic laws, more so, when ther e is no 
inconsistency between them and there is a void in dome stic law . (See 
with advantage — Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Admn. Mackinnon 
Mackenzie and Co. Ltd. v. Audrey D’ Costa; Sheela Bar se v. Secy., 
Children’s Aid Society SCC at p. 54; Vishaka v. Stat e of Rajasthan 
People’s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India  and D.K. Basu v. State 
of W.B. SCC at p. 438.) 
27. In cases involving violation of human rights, the courts must forever 
remain alive to the international instruments and conventi ons and apply 
the same to a given case when there is no inconsistenc y between the 
international norms and the domestic law occupying the f ield. In the 
instant case, the High Court appears to have totally ignor ed the intent 
and content of the international conventions and norms wh ile dealing 
with the case .” 
 
(ii)  Krishna Janardhan Bhat v. Dattaraya G. Hegde 42  
In the instant case, this Court relied upon international conventions to 
determine the true import of ‘burden of proof’, under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881.  This Court held as under: 
“44. The presumption of innocence is a human right . (See Narendra 
Singh v. State of M.P., Ranjitsing Brahmajeetsing Sha rma v. State of 
Maharashtra and Rajesh Ranjan Yadav v. CBI.) Article 6(2) of the 
European Convention on Human Rights provides: “Everyo ne charged 
with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent u ntil proved guilty 
according to law.” Although India is not bound by the aforementioned 
Convention and as such it may not be necessary like th e countries 
forming European countries to bring common law into la nd with the 
Convention, a balancing of the accused’s rights and th e interest of the 
society is required to be taken into consideration . In India, however, 
subject to the statutory interdicts, the said principle for ms the basis of 
criminal jurisprudence. For the aforementioned purpos e the nature of 
the offence, seriousness as also gravity thereof may be taken into 
consideration. The courts must be on guard to see that merely on the 
application of presumption as contemplated under Sec tion 139 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act, the same may not lead to injus tice or 
mistaken conviction . It is for the aforementioned reasons that we have 
taken into consideration the decisions operating in the f ield where the 
difficulty of proving a negative has been emphasised . It is not suggested 
that a negative can never be proved but there are cases  where such 
                                                 
42  (2008) 4 SCC 54 259 difficulties are faced by the accused e.g. honest and  reasonable mistake 
of fact. In a recent article The Presumption of Innocen ce and Reverse 
Burdens: A Balancing Duty published in 2007 CLJ (Ma rch Part) 142 it 
has been stated: 
“In determining whether a reverse burden is compatib le with the 
presumption of innocence regard should also be had to  the pragmatics of 
proof. How difficult would it be for the prosecution to  prove guilt without 
the reverse burden? How easily could an innocent defe ndant discharge 
the reverse burden? But courts will not allow these pra gmatic 
considerations to override the legitimate rights of the d efendant. 
Pragmatism will have greater sway where the reverse b urden would not 
pose the risk of great injustice—where the offence is not too serious or 
the reverse burden only concerns a matter incidental to  guilt. And 
greater weight will be given to prosecutorial efficie ncy in the regulatory 
environment.” 
45. We are not oblivious of the fact that the said prov ision has been 
inserted to regulate the growing business, trade, comm erce and 
industrial activities of the country and the strict liabil ity to promote 
greater vigilance in financial matters and to safegua rd the faith of the 
creditor  in the drawer of the cheque which is essential to the economic 
life of a developing country like India. This, howev er, shall not mean that 
the courts shall put a blind eye to the ground realities.  Statute mandates 
raising of presumption but it stops at that. It does no t say how 
presumption drawn should be held to have rebutted. Othe r important 
principles of legal jurisprudence, namely, presumpti on of innocence as 
human rights and the doctrine of reverse burden introdu ced by Section 
139 should be delicately balanced . Such balancing acts, indisputably 
would largely depend upon the factual matrix of each case, the materials 
brought on record and having regard to legal princip les governing the 
same.” 
 
(iii) State of Kerala v. Peoples Union for Civil Libe rties 43  
The issue that arose for consideration in the instant c ase was with reference 
to the binding nature of the Indigenous and Tribal Po pulations Convention, 
1957 and the declarations on the Rights of Indigenous  People, 2007.  Even 
though India had ratified convention and declaration, i t was held, that the 
same were not binding.  Reference may be made to the f ollowing 
observations recorded in the above judgment: 
                                                 
43  (2009) 8 SCC 46 260 “105. We may notice that in Indigenous and Tribal Pop ulations 
Convention, 1957 which has been ratified by 27 countri es including 
India contained the following clauses: 
“Article 11.—The right of ownership, collective or ind ividual, of the 
members of the populations concerned over the lands w hich these 
populations traditionally occupy shall be recognised . 
Article 12.—1. The populations concerned shall not be  removed without 
their free consent from their habitual territories excep t in accordance 
with national laws and regulations for reasons relati ng to national 
security, or in the interest of national economic deve lopment or of the 
health of the said populations. 
2. When in such cases removal of these populations is  necessary as an 
exceptional measure, they shall be provided with lands  of quality at least 
equal to that of the lands previously occupied by them , suitable to 
provide for their present needs and future developmen t. In cases where 
chances of alternative employment exist and where the p opulations 
concerned prefer to have compensation in money or in  kind, they shall 
be so compensated under appropriate guarantees. 
3. Persons thus removed shall be fully compensated f or any resulting 
loss or injury. 
Article 13.—1. Procedures for the transmission of righ ts of ownership 
and use of land which are established by the customs of the populations 
concerned shall be respected, within the framework of  national laws and 
regulations, insofar as they satisfy the needs of these populations and do 
not hinder their economic and social development. 
2. Arrangements shall be made to prevent persons who a re not members 
of the populations concerned from taking advantage of these customs or 
of lack of understanding of the laws on the part of th e members of these 
populations to secure the ownership or use of the lan ds belonging to 
such members.” 
Thus, removal of the population, by way of an excep tional measure, is 
not ruled out. It is only subject to the condition that l ands of quality at 
least equal to that of the lands previously occupied by  them, suitable to 
provide for their present needs and future development.  We may, 
however, notice that this Convention has not been ratifi ed by many 
countries in the Convention held in 1989. Those who h ave ratified the 
1989 Convention are not bound by it. 
106. Furthermore, the United Nations adopted a Declarati on on the 
Rights of Indigenous People in September 2007. Articl es 3 to 5 thereof 
read as under: 
“3. Indigenous peoples have the right to self-determi nation. By virtue of 
that right they freely determine their political status a nd freely pursue 
their economic, social and cultural development. 
4. Indigenous peoples, in exercising their right to self-determination, 
have the right to autonomy or self-government in matters  relating to their 
internal and local affairs, as well as ways and mean s for financing their 
autonomous functions. 261 5. Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain and s trengthen their 
distinct political, legal, economic, social and cult ural institutions, while 
retaining their right to participate fully, if they so cho ose, in the political, 
economic, social and cultural life of the State.” 
107. It is now accepted that the Panchasheel doctrine wh ich provided 
that the tribes could flourish and develop only if the State interfered 
minimally and functioned chiefly as a support system i n view of passage 
of time is no longer valid. Even the notion of autonom y contained in the 
1989 Convention has been rejected by India. However,  India appears to 
have softened its stand against autonomy for tribal peo ple and it has 
voted in favour of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous People which affirms various rights to au tonomy that are 
inherent in the tribal peoples of the world. This decl aration, however, is 
not binding .” 
 
(iv) Safai Karamchari Andolan v. Union of India 44  
In the instant case, the question that arose for considera tion revolved 
around the validity of the inhuman practice of manual ly removing night 
soil, which involves removal of human excrements fro m dry toilets with bare 
hands, brooms or metal scrappers, and thereupon, car rying the same in 
baskets to dumping sites for disposal.  Dealing with th e issue in the context 
of international conventions and declarations, this Cour t observed as 
under: 
“16. Apart from the provisions of the Constitution, there  are various 
international conventions and covenants to which India i s a party, which 
proscribe the inhuman practice of manual scavenging. These are the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), the Con vention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CE RD) and the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimi nation Against 
Women (CEDAW). The relevant provisions of UDHR, CERD  and CEDAW 
are hereunder: 
Article 1 of UDHR 
“1. All human beings are born free and equal in dig nity and rights. They 
are endowed with reason and conscience and should ac t towards one 
another in a spirit of brotherhood.” 
Article 2 of UDHR 
“2. Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedom set forth in this 
Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, 
                                                 
44  (2014) 11 SCC 224 262 language, religion, political or other opinion, natio nal or social origin, 
property, birth or other status.” 
Article 23(3) of UDHR 
“23. (3) Everyone who works has the right to just and f avourable 
remuneration ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of 
human dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by o ther means of social 
protection.” 
Article 5(a) of CEDAW 
“5. States parties shall take all appropriate measures— 
(a) to modify the social and cultural patterns of con duct of men and 
women, with a view to achieving the elimination of prej udice and 
customary and all other practices which are based on th e idea of the 
inferiority or the superiority of either of the sexes  or on stereotyped roles 
for men and women;” 
Article 2 of CERD 
“2. (1) States parties condemn racial discrimination a nd undertake to 
pursue by all appropriate means and without delay a po licy of 
eliminating racial discrimination in all its forms an d promoting 
understanding among all races, and, to this end— 
* * * 
(c) each State party shall take effective measures to re view governmental, 
national and local policies, and to amend, rescind or  nullify any laws and 
regulations which have the effect of creating or perpetu ating racial 
discrimination wherever it exists; 
(d) each State party shall prohibit and bring to an en d, by all appropriate 
means, including legislation as required by circums tances, racial 
discrimination by any persons, group or organisation ;” 
The above provisions of the International Covenants, w hich have been 
ratified by India, are binding to the extent that they a re not inconsistent 
with the provisions of the domestic law .” 
 
189. In view of the above, we are satisfied, that inter national conventions 
and declarations are of utmost importance, and have to b e taken into 
consideration while interpreting domestic laws.  But, th ere is one important 
exception to the above rule, and that is, that internation al conventions as 
are not in conflict with domestic law, alone can be re lied upon.  We are of 
the  firm opinion, that the disputation in hand falls in  the above exception.  
Insofar as ‘personal law’ is concerned, the same has  constitutional 
protection.  Therefore if ‘personal law’ is in confli ct with international 263 conventions and declarations, ‘personal law’ will pre vail.  The contention 
advanced on behalf of the petitioners to hold the practic e of ‘talaq-e-biddat’, 
on account it being in conflict with conventions and de clarations to which 
India is a signatory can therefore not be acceded to. 
X.   Conclusions emerging out of the above considerati on : 
190. The following conclusions emerge from the consi derations recorded 
at I to IX above: 
(1) Despite the decision of the Rashid Ahmad case 1 on the subject of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’, by the Privy Council, the issue needs  a fresh examination, 
in view of the subsequent developments in the matter. 
(2) All the parties were unanimous, that despite the pra ctice of ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ being considered sinful, it was accepted amon gst Sunni Muslims 
belonging to the Hanafi school, as valid in law, and has been in practice 
amongst them. 
(3) It would not be appropriate for this Court, to record  a finding, 
whether the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ is, or is not, a ffirmed by ‘hadiths’, in 
view of the enormous contradictions in the ‘hadiths’, r elied upon by the rival 
parties. 
(4) ‘Talaq-e-biddat’  is integral to the religious deno mination of Sunnis 
belonging to the Hanafi school.  The same is a part of  their faith, having 
been followed for more than 1400 years, and as such,  has to be accepted as 
being constituent of their ‘personal law’. 
(5) The contention of the petitioners, that the questions/su bjects 
covered by the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Applicati on Act, 1937, ceased 264 to be ‘personal law’, and got transformed into ‘statutor y law’, cannot be 
accepted, and is accordingly rejected. 
(6) ‘Talaq-e-biddat’, does not violate the parameters e xpressed in Article 
25 of the Constitution.  The practice is not contrary to public order, 
morality and health.  The practice also does not viola te Articles 14, 15 and 
21 of the Constitution, which are limited to State action s alone. 
(7) The practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ being a constitue nt of ‘personal law’ 
has a stature equal to other fundamental rights, confer red in Part III of the 
Constitution.  The practice cannot therefore be set asi de, on the ground of 
being violative of the concept of the constitutional m orality, through judicial 
intervention. 
(8) Reforms to ‘personal law’ in India, with referenc e to  socially 
unacceptable practices in different religions, have co me about only by way 
of legislative intervention. Such legislative interventi on is permissible under 
Articles 25(2) and 44, read with entry 5 of the Concurr ent List, contained in 
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.  The said proc edure alone need to 
be followed with reference to the practice of ‘talaq-e- biddat’, if the same is to 
be set aside. 
(9) International conventions and declarations are of n o avail in the 
present controversy, because the practice of ‘talaq-e-bi ddat’, is a component 
of ‘personal law’, and has the protection of Article 2 5 of the Constitution. 
Part-10.  
The declaration:  
 
191. The whole nation seems to be up in arms.  There  is seemingly an 
overwhelming majority of Muslim-women, demanding tha t the practice of 265 ‘talaq-e-biddat’ which is sinful in theology, be decl ared as impermissible in 
law.  The Union of India, has also participated in th e debate.  It has adopted 
an aggressive posture, seeking the invalidation of th e practice by 
canvassing, that it violates the fundamental rights ensh rined in Part III of 
the Constitution, and by further asserting, that it even violates 
constitutional morality.  During the course of hearin g, the issue was hotly 
canvassed in the media.  Most of the views expressed in erudite articles on 
the subject, hugely affirmed that the practice was demean ing.  Interestingly 
even during the course of hearing, learned counsel appearing for the rival 
parties, were in agreement, and described the practice  of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 
differently as, unpleasant, distasteful and unsavory.  The position adopted 
by others was harsher, they considered it as disgusti ng, loathsome and 
obnoxious.  Some even described it as being debased,  abhorrent and 
wretched. 
192. We have arrived at the conclusion, that ‘talaq-e-b iddat’, is a matter 
of ‘personal law’ of Sunni Muslims, belonging to the  Hanafi school.  It 
constitutes a matter of their faith. It has been practiced by them, for at least 
1400 years.  We have examined whether the practice sati sfies the 
constraints provided for under Article 25 of the Consti tution, and have 
arrived at the conclusion, that it does not breach any of  them.  We have also 
come to the conclusion, that the practice being a compon ent of ‘personal 
law’, has the protection of Article 25 of the Constitutio n. 
193.   Religion is a matter of faith, and not of logic.   It is not open to a 
court to accept an egalitarian approach, over a practice  which constitutes 266 an integral part of religion.  The Constitution allows the followers of every 
religion, to follow their beliefs and religious tradi tions.  The Constitution 
assures believers of all faiths, that their way of lif e, is guaranteed, and 
would not be subjected to any challenge, even though th ey may seem to 
others (-and even rationalists, practicing the same fa ith) unacceptable, in 
today’s world and age.  The Constitution extends this g uarantee, because 
faith constitutes the religious consciousness, of the fo llowers.  It is this 
religious consciousness, which binds believers into separate entities.  The 
Constitution endevours to protect and preserve, the bel iefs of each of the 
separate entities, under Article 25. 
194. Despite the views expressed by those who challen ged the practice of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’, being able to demonstrate that the practic e transcends the 
barriers of constitutional morality (emerging from d ifferent provisions of the 
Constitution), we have found ourselves unable to pers uade ourselves, from 
reaching out in support of the petitioners concerns.  We  cannot accept the 
petitioners’ claim, because the challenge raised is in  respect of an issue of 
‘personal law’ which has constitutional protection. 
195. In continuation of the position expressed above, w e may 
acknowledge, that most of the prayers made to the Court ( -at least on first 
blush) were persuasive enough, to solicit acceptance.  Keeping in mind, that 
this opportunity had presented itself, so to say, to ass uage the cause of 
Muslim women, it was felt, that the opportunity should n ot be lost.  We are 
however satisfied that, that would not be the rightful c ourse to tread.  We 
were obliged to keep reminding ourselves, of the wisd oms of the framers of 267 the Constitution, who placed matters of faith in Part I II of the Constitution.  
Therefore, any endeavour to proceed on issues canva ssed before us would, 
tantamount to overlooking the clear letter of law.   We  cannot nullify and 
declare as unacceptable in law, what the Constitution d ecrees us, not only 
to protect, but also to enforce.  The authority to safe guard and compel 
compliance, is vested under a special jurisdiction in  constitutional Courts (-
under Article 32, with the Supreme Court; and under Ar ticle 226, with the 
High Courts). Accepting the petitioners prayers, would be in clear 
transgression of the constitutional mandate contained in Article 25. 
196. Such a call of conscience, as the petitioners des ire us to accept,  
may well have a cascading effect.  We say so, becaus e the contention of the 
learned Attorney General was, that ‘talaq-e-ahsan’ and ‘ talaq-e-hasan’ were 
also liable to be declared unconstitutional, for the s ame reasons as have 
been expressed with reference to ‘talaq-e-biddat’ (-for  details, refer to 
paragraph 77 above).  According to the learned Attorney  General, the said 
forms of talaq also suffered from the same infirmities  as ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  
The practices of ‘polygamy’ and ‘halala’ amongst Mus lims are already under 
challenge before us. It is not difficult to comprehen d, what kind of 
challenges would be raised by rationalists, assailing  practices of different 
faiths on diverse grounds, based on all kinds of enl ightened sensibilities.  
We have to be guarded, lest we find our conscience tra versing into every 
nook and corner of religious practices, and ‘persona l law’.  Can a court, 
based on a righteous endeavour, declare that a matter o f faith, be replaced – 
or be completely done away with. In the instant case, both prayers have 268 been made. Replacement has been sought by reading th e three 
pronouncements in ‘talaq-e-biddat’, as one. Alternativel y, replacement has 
been sought by reading into ‘talaq-e-biddat’, measures  of arbitration and 
conciliation, described in the Quran and the ‘hadiths ’.  The prayer is also 
for setting aside the practice, by holding it to be unc onstitutional. The 
wisdom emerging from judgments rendered by this Cour t is unambiguous, 
namely, that while examining issues falling in the re alm of religious 
practices or ‘personal law’, it is not for a court to m ake a choice of 
something which it considers as forward looking or no n-fundamentalist.  It 
is not for a court to determine whether religious prac tices were prudent or 
progressive or regressive.  Religion and ‘personal law’, must be perceived, as 
it is accepted, by the followers of the faith.  And not , how another would like 
it  to be (-including self-proclaimed rationalists, of th e same faith).  Article 
25 obliges all Constitutional Courts to protect ‘personal  laws’ and not to 
find fault therewith.  Interference in matters of ‘pers onal law’ is clearly 
beyond judicial examination.  The judiciary must there fore, always exercise 
absolute restraint, no matter how compelling and attractive  the opportunity 
to do societal good may seem.  It is therefore, that this Court had the 
occasion to observe, “….. However laudible, desirab le and attractive the 
result may seem … an  activist Court is not fully equi pped to cope with the 
intricacies of the legislative subject and can at best advise and focus 
attention on the State polity on the problem and shake it from its slumber, 
goading it to awaken, march and reach the goal.  For , in whatever measure 269 be the concern of this Court, it compulsively needs to a pply, motion, 
described in judicial parlance as self-restraint …..”30  
197. We have arrived at the conclusion, that the legal c hallenge raised at 
the behest of the petitioners must fail, on the judicial front.  Be that as it 
may, the question still remains, whether this is a fit ca se for us to exercise 
our jurisdiction under Article 142, “…for doing compl ete justice …”, in the 
matter.  The reason for us to probe the possibility o f exercising our 
jurisdiction under Article 142, arises only for one s imple reason, that all 
concerned are unequivocal, that besides being arbitrar y the practice of 
‘talaq-e-biddat’ is gender discriminatory.    
198. A perusal of the consideration recorded by us re veals, that the 
practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ has been done away with, b y way of legislation in 
a large number of egalitarian States, with sizeable Mu slim population and 
even by theocratic Islamic States.  Even the AIMPLB, the  main contestant of 
the petitioners’ prayers, whilst accepting the position c anvassed on behalf of 
the petitioners, assumed the position, that it was not w ithin the realm of 
judicial discretion, to set aside a matter of faith and religion.  We have 
accepted the position assumed by the AIMPLB. It was ho wever 
acknowledged even by the AIMPLB, that legislative will,  could salvage the 
situation.  This assertion was based on a conjoint rea ding of Articles 25(2) 
and Article 44 of the Constitution, read with entry 5 of  the Concurrent List 
contained in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.  There can be no 
doubt, and it is our definitive conclusion, that the pos ition can only be 
salvaged by way of legislation.  We understand, that it is not appropriate to 270 tender advice to the legislature, to enact law on an iss ue.  However, the 
position as it presents in the present case, seems to be  a little different. 
Herein, the views expressed by the rival parties are n ot in contradiction.  
The Union of India has appeared before us in suppor t of the cause of the 
petitioners.  The stance adopted by the Union of India is sufficient for us to 
assume, that the Union of India supports the petitioners’ cause.  
Unfortunately, the Union seeks at our hands, what truly  falls in its own.  
The main party that opposed the petitoners’ challenge, n amely, the AIMPLB 
filed an affidavit before this Court affirming the fol lowing position: 
“1.  I am the Secretary of All India Muslim Personal  Board will issue an 
advisory through its Website, Publications and Social M edia Platforms 
and thereby advise the persons who perform ‘Nikah’ (m arriage) and 
request them to do the following:- 
(a)  At the time of performing ‘Nikah’ (marriage), the person performing 
the ‘Nikah’ will advise the Bridegroom/Man that in case  of differences 
leading to Talaq the Bridegroom/Man shall not pronounc e three divorces 
in one sitting since it is an undesirable practice in S hariat ; 
(b) That at the time of performing ‘Nikah’ (Marriage),  the person 
performing the ‘Nikah’ will advise both the Bridegroom /Man and the 
Bride/Woman to incorporate a condition in the ‘Nikahna ma’ to exclude 
resorting to pronouncement of three divorces by her h usband in one 
sitting . 
3.   I say and submit that, in addition, the Board is placing on record, 
that the Working Committee of the Board had earlier alrea dy passed 
certain resolutions in the meeting held on 15 th  & 16 th  April, 2017 in 
relation to Divorce (Talaq) in the Muslim community.  Thereby it was 
resolved to convey a code of conduct/guidelines to be followed in the 
matters of divorce particularly emphasizing to avoid pronouncement of 
three divorces in one sitting .  A copy of the resolution dated April 16, 
2017 along with the relevant Translation of Resolutio n Nos. 2, 3, 4 & 5 
relating to Talaq (Divorce) is enclosed herewith for the perusal of this 
Hon’ble Court and marked as Annexure A-1 (Colly) [Pa ge Nos. 4 to 12] to 
the present Affidavit.” 
 
A perusal of the above affidavit reveals, that the AI MPLB has undertaken to 
issue an advisory through its website, to advise those w ho enter into a 
matrimonial alliance, to agree in the ‘nikah-nama’, tha t their marriage 271 would not be dissolvable by ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  The AIM PLB has sworn an 
affidavit to prescribe guidelines, to be followed in matters of divorce, 
emphasizing that ‘talaq-e-biddat’ be avoided.   It woul d not be incorrect to 
assume, that even the AIMPLB is on board, to assuage the  petitioner’s 
cause. 
199. In view of the position expressed above, we are  satisfied, that  this is 
a case which presents a situation where this Court shou ld exercise its 
discretion to issue appropriate directions under Article  142 of the 
Constitution.  We therefore hereby direct, the Union o f India to consider 
appropriate legislation, particularly with reference to  ‘talaq-e-biddat’.  We 
hope and expect, that the contemplated legislation will also take into 
consideration advances in Muslim ‘personal law’ – ‘S hariat’, as have been 
corrected by legislation the world over, even by theoc ratic Islamic States.  
When the British rulers in India provided succor to M uslims by legislation, 
and when remedial measures have been adopted by the M uslim world, we 
find no reason, for an independent India, to lag beh ind.  Measures have 
been adopted for other religious denominations (see a t IX – Reforms to 
‘personal law’ in India), even in India, but not for  the Muslims.  We would 
therefore implore the legislature, to bestow its thoughtful  consideration, to 
this issue of paramount importance.  We would also bes eech different 
political parties to keep their individual political gai ns apart, while 
considering the necessary measures requiring legisla tion. 
200. Till such time as legislation in the matter is con sidered, we are 
satisfied in injuncting Muslim husbands, from pronou ncing ‘talaq-e-biddat’ 272 as a means for severing their matrimonial relationship .  The instant 
injunction, shall in the first instance, be operative f or a period of six 
months.  If the legislative process commences before the expiry of the period 
of six months, and a positive decision emerges towar ds redefining ‘talaq-e-
biddat’ (three pronouncements of ‘talaq’, at one and the  same time) – as one, 
or alternatively, if it is decided that the practice of ‘ talaq-e-biddat’ be done 
away with altogether, the injunction would continue, ti ll legislation is finally 
enacted.  Failing which, the injunction shall cease to operate. 
201. Disposed of in the above terms. 
 
 
..………………..…..………CJI. 
           (Jagdish Singh Khehar) 
 
 
 
..………………..…..…….……J. 
           (S. Abdul Nazeer) 
 
Note:  The emphases supplied in all the quotations in the ins tant 
judgment, are ours. 
 
New Delhi; 
August 22, 2017. 273 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION 
 
 
SUO MOTU WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2 OF 2015  
 
IN RE: MUSLIM WOMEN’S QUEST  
FOR EQUALITY                          … 
PETITIONER (S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
JAMIAT ULMA-I-HIND AND OTHERS    …RESPONDENT 
(S) 
 
WITH  
 
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 118 OF 2016,  
 
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 288 OF 2016,  
 
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 327 OF 2016,  
 
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 665 OF 2016 and  
 
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 43 OF 2017.  
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
 
KURIAN, J. : 
 
1.  What is bad in theology was once good in law but af ter Shariat 
has been declared as the personal law, whether what  is 
Quranically wrong can be legally right is the issue  to be 
considered in this case. Therefore, the simple ques tion that REPORTABLE 274 needs to be answered in this case is only whether t riple talaq has 
any legal sanctity. That is no more res integra . This Court in 
Shamim Ara  v. State of UP and Another 45  has held, though not 
in so many words, that triple talaq lacks legal san ctity. Therefore, 
in terms of Article 141 46 , Shamim Ara  is the law that is 
applicable in India. 
2.  Having said that, I shall also make an independent endeavor to 
explain the legal position in Shamim Ara  and lay down the law 
explicitly.  
3.  The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 
(hereinafter referred to as “the 1937 Act”) was ena cted to put an 
end to the unholy, oppressive and discriminatory cu stoms and 
usages in the Muslim community. 47  Section 2 is most relevant in 
the face of the present controversy.  
                                                 
45  (2002) 7 SCC 518 
46 141. Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on  all courts.- The law declared 
by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts  within the territory of India. 
47 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
For several years past it has been the cherished de sire of the 
Muslims of British India that Customary Law should in no case take the 
place of Muslim Personal Law. The matter has been r epeatedly agitated in 
the press as well as on the platform. The Jamiat-ul -Ulema-i-Hind, the 
greatest Moslem religious body has supported the de mand and invited the 
attention of all concerned to the urgent necessity of introducing a measure 
to this effect. Customary Law is a misnomer in as m uch as it has not any 
sound basis to stand upon and is very much liable t o frequent changes and 
cannot be expected to attain at any time in the fut ure that certainty and 
definiteness which must be the characteristic of al l laws. The status of 
Muslim women under the so-called Customary Law is s imply disgraceful. 
All the Muslim Women Organisations have therefore c ondemned the 
Customary Law as it adversely affects their rights.  They demand that the 
Muslim Personal Law ( Shariat ) should be made applicable to them. The 
introduction of Muslim Personal Law will automatica lly raise them to the 275 2. Application of Personal law to Muslims. – 
Notwithstanding any custom or usage to the 
contrary, in all questions (save questions relating  
to agricultural land) regarding intestate 
succession, special property of females, including 
personal property inherited or obtained under 
contract or gift or any other provision of Personal  
Law, marriage, dissolution of marriage, including 
talaq , ila, zihar, lian, khula and mubaraat , 
maintenance, dower, guardianship, gifts, trusts 
and trust properties, and wakfs  (other than 
charities and charitable institutions and charitabl e 
and religious endowments) the rule of decision in  
cases where the parties are Muslims shall be 
Muslim Personal Law ( Shariat ).  
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
4.  After the 1937 Act, in respect of the enumerated su bjects under 
Section 2 regarding “marriage, dissolution of marri age, including 
talaq”, the law that is applicable to Muslims shall  be only their 
personal law namely Shariat. Nothing more, nothing less. It is not 
a legislation regulating talaq. In contradistinctio n, The Dissolution 
of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 provides for the grou nds for 
dissolution of marriage. So is the case with the Hi ndu Marriage 
                                                                                                                                            
position to which they are naturally entitled.  In addition to this present 
measure, if enacted, would have very salutary effec t on society because it 
would ensure certainty and definiteness in the mutu al rights and 
obligations of the public. Muslim Personal Law ( Shariat ) exists in the form 
of a veritable code and is too well known to admit of any doubt or to entail 
any great labour in the shape of research, which is  the chief feature of 
Customary Law .  
                                                                                                  (Emp hasis supplied) 276 Act, 1955. The 1937 Act simply makes Shariat applic able as the 
rule of decision in the matters enumerated in secti on 2. 
Therefore, while talaq is governed by Shariat, the specific 
grounds and procedure for talaq have not been codif ied in the 
1937 Act.  
5.  In that view of the matter, I wholly agree with the  learned Chief 
Justice that the 1937 Act is not a legislation regu lating talaq. 
Consequently, I respectfully disagree with the stan d taken by 
Nariman, J. that the 1937 Act is a legislation regu lating triple talaq 
and hence, the same can be tested on the anvil of A rticle 14. 
However, on the pure question of law that a legisla tion, be it 
plenary or subordinate, can be challenged on the gr ound of 
arbitrariness, I agree with the illuminating exposi tion of law by 
Nariman, J. I am also of the strong view that the C onstitutional 
democracy of India cannot conceive of a legislation  which is 
arbitrary.  
6.  Shariat, having been declared to be Muslim Personal  Law by the 
1937 Act, we have to necessarily see what Shariat i s. This has 
been beautifully explained by the renowned author, Asaf A.A. 
Fyzee in his book  Outlines of Muhammadan Law, 5 th  Edition, 
2008  at page 10. 48  
                                                 
48  Tahir Mahmood (ed.), Asaf A.A. Fyzee Outlines of M uhammadan Law, 5 th  edition 2008. 277 “…What is morally beautiful that must be done; 
and what is morally ugly must not be done. That is 
law or Shariat  and nothing else can be law. But 
what is absolutely and indubitably beautiful, and 
what is absolutely and indubitably ugly? These 
are the important legal questions; and who can 
answer them? Certainly not man, say the Muslim 
legists. We have the Qur’an which is the very 
word of God. Supplementary to it we have Hadith  
which are the Traditions of the Prophet- the 
records of his actions and his sayings- from which 
we must derive help and inspiration in arriving at 
legal decisions. If there is nothing either in the 
Qur’an or in the Hadith  to answer the particular 
question which is before us, we have to follow the 
dictates of secular reason in accordance with 
certain definite principles. These principles 
constitute the basis of sacred law or Shariat as the 
Muslim doctors understand it.  And it is these 
fundamental juristic notions which we must try to 
study and analyse before we approach the study 
of the Islamic civil law as a whole, or even that 
small part of it which in India is known as Muslim 
law.” 
 
7.  There are four sources for Islamic law- (i) Quran ( ii) Hadith (iii) 
Ijma (iv) Qiyas. The learned author has rightly sai d that the Holy 
Quran is the “first source of law”. According to th e learned 
author, pre-eminence is to be given to the Quran. T hat means, 
sources other than the Holy Quran are only to suppl ement what is 
given in it and to supply what is not provided for.  In other words, 
there cannot be any Hadith, Ijma or Qiyas against w hat is 278 expressly stated in the Quran.  Islam cannot be ant i-Quran. 
According to Justice Bader Durrez Ahmad in Masroor Ahmed  v. 
State (NCT of Delhi) & Another 49 : 
   “14. In essence, the Shariat is a compendium of rules 
guiding the life of a Muslim from birth to death in  all 
aspects of law, ethics and etiquette. These rules h ave 
been crystallized through the process of ijtihad  
employing the sophisticated jurisprudential techniq ues. 
The primary source is the Quran . Yet, in matters not 
directly covered by the divine book, rules were 
developed looking to the hadis and upon driving a 
consensus . The differences arose between the schools 
because of reliance on different hadis , differences in 
consensus and differences on qiyas  and aql  as the case 
may be.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
8.  It is in that background that I make an attempt to see what the 
Quran states on talaq. There is reference to talaq in three Suras- 
in Sura II while dealing with social life of the co mmunity, in Sura 
IV while dealing with decencies of family life and in Sura LXV 
while dealing explicitly with talaq. 
9.  Sura LXV of the Quran deals with talaq. It reads as  follows: 
“Talaq , or Divorce.  
 
In the name of God, Most Gracious, 
                                         Most Merci ful.                      
 
1. O Prophet! When ye 
Do divorce women, 
Divorce them at their 
Prescribed periods, 
                                                 
49  ILR  (2007) II Delhi 1329 279 And count (accurately) 
Their prescribed periods: 
And fear God your Lord: 
And turn them not out 
Of their houses, nor shall 
They (themselves) leave, 
Except in case they are  
Guilty of some open lewdness, 
Those are limits 
Set by God: and any 
Who transgresses the limits 
Of God, does verily  
Wrong his (own) soul: 
Thou knowest not if 
Perchance God will 
Bring about thereafter 
Some new situation. 
 
2. Thus when they fulfill 
Their term appointed,  
Either take them back 
On equitable terms 
Or part with them 
On equitable terms; 
And take for witness 
Two persons from among you, 
Endued with justice, 
And establish the evidence 
(As) before God.  Such 
Is the admonition given 
To him who believes 
In God and the Last Day. 
And for those who fear 
God, He (ever) prepares  
A way out, 
 
3. And He provides for him 
From (sources) he never 
Could imagine. And if 
Any one puts his trust 
In God, sufficient is (God) 
For him. For God will  
Surely accomplish His purpose : 
Verily, for all things 280 Has God appointed 
A due proportion.  
 
 
4. Such of your women 
As have passed the age 
Of monthly courses, for them 
The prescribed period, if ye 
Have any doubts, is 
Three months, and for those 
Who have no courses 
(It is the same): 
For those who carry 
(Life within their wombs), 
Their period is until 
They deliver their burdens : 
And for those who  
Fear God, He will 
Make their path easy.  
 
5. That is the Command 
Of God, which He 
Has sent down to you : 
And if any one fears God, 
He will remove his ills 
From him, and will enlarge 
His reward.  
 
 
6. Let the women live  
(In ‘ iddat ) in the same 
Style as ye live, 
According to your means : 
Annoy them not, so as 
To restrict them.  
And if they carry (life 
In their wombs), then 
Spend (your substance) on them  
Until they deliver 
Their burden : and if 
They suckle your (offspring), 
Give them their recompense : 
And take mutual counsel 
Together, according to 281 What is just and reasonable. 
And if ye find yourselves 
In difficulties, let another 
Woman suckle (the child) 
On the (father’s) behalf. 
 
7. Let the man of means 
Spend according to  
His means : and the man 
Whose resources are restricted, 
Let him spend according 
To what God has given him. 
God puts no burden 
On any person beyond 
What He has given him.  
After a difficulty, God 
Will soon grant relief.” 
 
Verse 35 in Sura IV of the Quran speaks on arbitrat ion for 
reconciliation- 
“35. If ye fear a breach 
Between them twain, 
Appoint (two) arbiters, 
One from his family, 
And the other from hers; 
If they wish for peace, 
God will cause  
Their reconciliation: 
For God hath full knowledge, 
And is acquainted 
With all things.” 
 
Sura II contains the following verses pertaining to  divorce: 282  
“226.For those who take 
An oath for abstention 
From their wives, 
A waiting for four months 
Is ordained; 
If then they return, 
God is Oft–forgiving, 
Most Merciful. 
 
227.But if their intention 
Is firm for divorce, 
God heareth 
And knoweth all things. 
 
228. Divorced women 
Shall wait concerning themselves 
For three monthly periods. 
Nor is it lawful for them 
To hide what God 
Hath created in their wombs, 
If they have faith 
In God and the Last Day. 
And their husbands 
Have the better right 283 To take them back 
In that period, if 
They wish for reconciliation. 
And women shall have rights 
Similar to the rights 
Against them, according 
To what is equitable; 
But men have a degree 
(of advantage) over them. 
And God is Exalted in Power, 
                                        Wise.” 
 
“229. A divorce is only 
Permissible twice: after that, 
The parties should either hold 
Together on equitable terms, 
Or separate with kindness. 
It is not lawful for you, 
(Men), to take back 
Any of your gifts (from your wives),  
Except when both parties 
Fear that they would be 
Unable to keep the limits 
Ordained by God. 
If ye (judges) do indeed 284 Fear that they would be 
Unable to keep the limits 
Ordained by God, 
There is no blame on either 
Of them if she give 
Something for her freedom. 
These are the limits 
Ordained by God; 
So do not transgress them 
If any do transgress 
The limits ordained by God, 
Such persons wrong 
(Themselves as well as others). 
 
230. So if a husband 
Divorces his wife (irrevocably), 
He cannot, after that, 
Re-marry her until  
After she has married 
Another husband and  
He has divorced her. 
In that case there is  
No blame on either of them 
If they re-unite, provided 
They feel that they 285 Can keep the limits 
Ordained by God. 
Such other limits 
Ordained by God, 
Which He makes plain 
To those who understand. 
 
231. When ye divorce 
Women, and they fulfill 
The term of their (‘ Iddat ), 
Either take them back 
On equitable terms 
Or set them free 
On equitable terms; 
But do not take them back 
To injure them, (or) to take 
Undue advantage; 
If anyone does that, 
He wrongs his own soul. 
Do not treat God’s Signs 
As a jest, 
But solemnly rehearse 
God’s favours on you, 
And the fact that He 
Sent down to you 286 The Book 
And Wisdom, 
For your instruction. 
And fear God, 
And know that God 
Is well acquainted 
With all things.” 50  
 
 
10.  These instructive verses do not require any interpr etative 
exercise. They are clear and unambiguous as far as talaq is 
concerned. The Holy Quran has attributed sanctity a nd 
permanence to matrimony. However, in extremely unav oidable 
situations, talaq is permissible. But an attempt fo r reconciliation 
and if it succeeds, then revocation are the Quranic  essential steps 
before talaq attains finality. 51  In triple talaq, this door is closed, 
hence, triple talaq is against the basic tenets of the Holy Quran 
and consequently, it violates Shariat.  
11.  The above view has been endorsed by various High Co urts, 
finally culminating in Shamim Ara  by this Court which has since 
                                                 
50  Verses from the Holy Quran as extracted above are taken from “The Holy Qur’an” 
translated by Abdullah Yusuf Ali which was agreed t o be a fair translation by all parties. 
51 Similar observations were made by the High Court of  Gauhati through Baharul Islam, J. in 
Jiauddin Ahmed v. Anwara Begum (1981) 1 Gau LR 358 wherein he noted that “though 
marriage under Muslim Law is only a civil contract yet the rights and responsibilities 
consequent upon it are of such importance to the we lfare of humanity, that a high degree 
of sanctity is attached to it. But in spite of the sacredness of the character of the marriage-
tie, Islam recognizes the necessity, in exceptional  circumstances, of keeping the way open 
for its dissolution ”. This view has been noted and approved of in Shamim Ara at 
paragraph 13. 
(Emphasis supplied) 287 been taken as the law for banning triple talaq.  In terestingly, 
prior to Shamim Ara , Krishna Iyer, J. in Fuzlunbi  v. K Khader 
Vali and Another 52 , while in a three judge bench in this Court, 
made a very poignant observation on the erroneous a pproach of 
Batchelor, J. in Sarabai  v. Rabiabai53  on the famous comment 
“good in law, though bad in theology”. To quote: 
 
“20. Before we bid farewell to Fuzlunbi  it is 
necessary to mention that Chief Justice Baharul 
Islam, in an elaborate judgment replete with 
quotes from the Holy Quoran, has exposed the 
error of early English authors and judges who 
dealt with talaq  in Muslim Law as good even if 
pronounced at whim or in tantrum, and argued 
against the diehard view of Batchelor, J. that this  
view “is good in law, though bad in theology”. 
Maybe, when the point directly arises, the 
question will have to be considered by this Court 
but enough unto the day the evil thereof and we 
do not express our opinion on this question as it 
does not call for a decision in the present case.” 
 
12.  More than two decades later, Shamim Ara  has referred to, as 
already noted above, the legal perspective across t he country on 
the issue of triple talaq starting with the decisio n of the Calcutta 
High Court in Furzund Hossein  v.  Janu Bibee 54  in 1878 and 
                                                 
52  (1980) 4 SCC 125  
53  ILR 30 Bom 537  
54  ILR (1878) 4 Cal 588 288 finally, after discussing two decisions of the Gauh ati High Court 
namely  Jiauddin Ahmed  v. Anwara Begum55   and  Rukia 
Khatun  v. Abdul Khalique Laskar 56 , this Court held as follows-  
 
“13. There is yet another illuminating and weighty 
judicial opinion available in two decisions of the 
Gauhati High Court recorded by Baharul Islam, J. 
(later a Judge of the Supreme Court of India) 
sitting singly in Jiauddin Ahmed v.  Anwara Begum  
(1981) 1 Gau LR 358 and later speaking for the 
Division Bench in Rukia Khatun v.Abdul Khalique 
Laskar (1981) 1 Gau LR 375. In Jiauddin Ahmed 
case  a plea of previous divorce i.e. the husband 
having divorced the wife on some day much 
previous to the date of filing of the written 
statement in the Court was taken and upheld. The 
question posed before the High Court was 
whether there has been valid talaq  of the wife by 
the husband under the Muslim law. The learned 
Judge observed that though marriage under the 
Muslim law is only a civil contract yet the rights 
and responsibilities consequent upon it are of 
such importance to the welfare of humanity, that a 
high degree of sanctity is attached to it. But insp ite 
of the sacredness of the character of the marriage 
tie, Islam recognizes the necessity, in exceptional  
circumstances, of keeping the way open for its 
dissolution (para 6). Quoting in the judgment 
several Holy Quranic verses and from 
commentaries thereon by well-recognized 
scholars of great eminence, the learned Judge 
expressed disapproval of the statement that "the 
whimsical and capricious divorce by the husband 
is good in law, though bad in theology" and 
                                                 
55  (1981) 1 Gau LR 358 
56  (1981) 1 Gau LR 375 289 observed that such a statement is based on the 
concept that women were chattel belonging to 
men, which the Holy Quran does not brook. The 
correct law of talaq  as ordained by the Holy Quran 
is that talaq  must be for a reasonable cause and 
be preceded by attempts at reconciliation 
between the husband and the wife by two arbiters 
- one from the wife's family and the other from the  
husband's; if the attempts fail, ‘ talaq’ may be  
effected. (para 13). In Rukia Khatun case , the 
Division Bench stated that the correct law of talaq  
as ordained by the Holy Quran, is: (i) that 'talaq'  
must be for a reasonable cause; and (ii) that it 
must be preceded by an attempt of reconciliation 
between the husband and the wife by two 
arbiters, one chosen by the wife from her family 
and the other by the husband from his. If their 
attempts fail, 'talaq' may be effected.  The Division 
Bench expressly recorded its dissent from the 
Calcutta and Bombay views which, in their 
opinion, did not lay down the correct law. 
 
14. We are in respectful agreement with the 
above said observations made by the learned 
Judges of High Courts…. ” 
 
                                                                               (Emphasis supplied) 
 
13.  There is also a fruitful reference to two judgments  of the Kerala 
High Court - one of Justice Krishna Iyer in A. Yousuf Rawther  v. 
Sowramma 57  and the other of Justice V. Khalid in Mohd. 
                                                 
57  AIR 1971 Ker 261 290 Haneefa  v. Pathummal Beevi 58 . No doubt, Sowaramma  was not 
a case on triple talaq, however, the issue has been  discussed in 
the judgment in paragraph 7 which has also been quo ted in 
Shamim Ara . 
 
“..The view that the Muslim husband enjoys an 
arbitrary, unilateral power to inflict instant 
divorce does not accord with Islamic injunctions. 
…It is a popular fallacy that a Muslim male enjoys,  
under the Quoranic law, unbridled authority to 
liquidate the marriage. ‘The whole Quoran 
expressly forbids a man to seek pretexts for 
divorcing his wife, so long as she remains faithful  
and obedient to him, "if they (namely, women) 
obey you, then do not seek a way against them”.’ 
(Quoran IV:34). The Islamic law gives to the man 
primarily the faculty of dissolving the marriage, i f 
the wife, by her indocility or her bad character, 
renders the married life unhappy; but in the 
absence of serious reasons, no man can justify a 
divorce, either in the eye of religion or the law. If 
he abandons his wife or puts her away in simple 
caprice, he draws upon himself the divine anger, 
for the curse of God, said the Prophet, rests on 
him who repudiates his wife capriciously." 
….Commentators on the Quoran have rightly 
observed - and this tallies with the law now 
administered in some Muslim countries like Iraq -
that the husband must satisfy the court about the 
reasons for divorce. However, Muslim law, as 
applied in India, has taken a course contrary to 
the spirit of what the Prophet or the Holy Quoran 
laid down and the same misconception vitiates the 
law dealing with the wife's right to divorce…" 
                                                 
58  1972 KLT 512 291   
 
14.  Khalid, J. has been more vocal in Mohd. Haneefa : 
“5..Should Muslim wives suffer this tyranny for all  
times? Should their personal law remain so cruel 
towards these unfortunate wives? Can it not be 
amended suitably to alleviate their sufferings? My 
judicial conscience is disturbed at this 
monstrosity. The question is whether the 
conscience of the leaders of public opinion of the 
community will also be disturbed.” 
 
 
15.   After a detailed discussion on the aforementioned cases, it has 
been specifically held by this Court in Shamim Ara , at 
paragraph 15 that “…there are no reasons substantia ted in 
justification of talaq  and no plea or proof that any effort at 
reconciliation preceded the talaq .” It has to be particularly noted 
that this conclusion by the Bench in Shamim Ara  is made after 
“respectful agreement ” with Jiauddin Ahmed  that “talaq must 
be for a reasonable cause and be preceded by attemp ts at 
reconciliation between the husband and the wife by two arbiters 
— one from the wife’s family and the other from the  husband’s; if 
the attempts fail, ‘ talaq ’ may be effected.” In the light of such  
specific findings as to how triple talaq is bad in law on account of 292 not following the Quranic principles, it cannot be said that there 
is no ratio decidendi  on triple talaq in Shamim Ara . 
16.  Shamim Ara  has since been understood by various High Courts 
across the country as the law deprecating triple ta laq as it is 
opposed to the tenets of the Holy Quran. Consequent ly, triple 
talaq lacks the approval of Shariat.  
17.  The High Court of Andhra Pradesh, in Zamrud Begum  v. K. Md. 
Haneef and another 59 , is one of the first High Courts to affirm the 
view adopted in Shamim Ara . The High Court, after referring to 
Shamim Ara  and all the other decisions mentioned therein, hel d 
in paragraphs 13 and 17 as follows:  
 
“13. It is observed by the Supreme Court in the 
above said decision that talaq may be oral or in 
writing and it must be for a reasonable cause. It 
must be preceded by an attempt of reconciliation 
of husband and wife by two arbitrators one 
chosen from the family of the wife and other by 
husband. If their attempts fail then talaq may be 
effected by pronouncement.  The said procedure 
has not been followed. The Supreme Court has 
culled out the same from Mulla  and the principles 
of Mahammedan Law. 
XXXX 
17. I am of the considered view that the alleged 
talaq is not a valid talaq as it is not in accordan ce 
with the principles laid down by the Supreme 
Court.  If there is no valid talaq the relationship of 
                                                 
59  (2003) 3 ALD 220 293 the wife with her husband still continues and she 
cannot be treated as a divorced wife….” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
18.  In A. S. Parveen Akthar  v. The Union of India 60 , the 
High Court of Madras was posed with the question on  the 
validity and constitutionality of Section 2 of the 1937 Act in so 
far as it recognises triple talaq as a valid form o f divorce. The 
Court referred to the provisions of the Quran, opin ions of 
various eminent scholars of Islamic Law and previou s judicial 
pronouncements including Shamim Ara  and came to the 
following conclusion:  
 
“45.Thus, the law with regard to talaq, as declared  
by the apex Court, is that talaq must be for a 
reasonable cause and must be preceded by 
attempt at reconciliation between the husband 
and the wife by two arbiters one chosen by wife's 
family and the other from husband's family and it 
is only if their attempts fail, talaq may be effect ed.  
                                                         XXXX 
48.Having regard to the law now declared by the 
apex Court in the case of Shamim Ara , 2002 AIR 
SCW 4162, talaq, in whatever form, must be for a 
reasonable cause, and must be preceded by 
attempts for reconciliation by arbiters chosen 
from the families of each of the spouses, the 
                                                 
60  2003-1-L.W. 370 294 petitioner's apprehension that notwithstanding 
absence of cause and no efforts having been 
made to reconcile the spouses, this form of talaq i s 
valid, is based on a misunderstanding of the law.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
As far as the constitutionality of Section 2 is con cerned, the 
Court refrained from going into the question in vie w of the 
decisions of this Court in Shri Krishna Singh  v. Mathura Ahir 
and Others  61  and Ahmedabad Women Action Group (AWAG) 
and Ors . v. Union of India 62 .  
 
19.  The High Court of Jammu and Kashmir, in  Manzoor Ahmad 
Khan  v.Saja & Ors. 63 , has also placed reliance on Shamim Ara . 
The Court, at paragraph 11, noted that in Shamim Ara , the Apex 
Court relied upon the passages from judgments of va rious High 
Courts “which are eye openers for those who think t hat a Muslim 
man can divorce his wife merely at whim or on capri ce.” The 
Court finally held that the marriage between the pa rties did not 
stand dissolved. 
                                                 
61  (1981) 3 SCC 689 
62  (1997) 3 SCC 573 
63  2010 (4) JKJ 380 295 20.  In Ummer Farooque  v. Naseema 64 , Justices R Bhaskaran and 
K.P. Balachandran of the High Court of Kerala, afte r due 
consideration of the prior decisions of the various  Courts, in 
paragraphs 5 and 6 held that: 
“5…The general impression as reflected in the 
decision of a Division Bench of this Court in  
Pathayi v. Moideen (1968 KLT 763) was that the 
only condition necessary for a valid exercise of 
the right of divorce by a husband is that he must 
be a major and of sound mind at the that time and 
he can effect divorce whenever he desires and no 
witnesses are necessary for dissolution of the 
marriage and the moment when talaq is 
pronounced, dissolution of marriage is effected; it  
can be conveyed by the husband to the wife and it 
need not be even addressed to her and it takes 
effect the moment it comes to her knowledge etc. 
But this can no longer be accepted in view of the 
authoritative pronouncement of the Supreme 
Court in Shamim Ara v. State of U.P . [2002 (3) KLT 
537 (SC)].  
6. The only thing to be further considered in this 
case is whether the divorce alleged to have been 
effected by the husband by pronouncement of 
talaq on 23-7-1999 is proved or not. The mere 
pronouncement of talaq three times even in the 
presence of the wife is not sufficient to effect a 
divorce under Mohammadan Law. As held by the 
Supreme Court in Shamim Ara's  case [2002 (3) KLT 
537 (SC)], there should be an attempt of mediation 
by two mediators; one on the side of the husband 
and the other on the side of the wife and only in 
case it was a failure that the husband is entitled to 
pronounce talaq to divorce the wife… ” 
                                                 
64  2005 (4) KLT 565 296 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
21.  In Masroor Ahmed , Justice Badar Durrez Ahmed, held as 
follows: 
“32. In these circumstances (the circumstances 
being – (1) no evidence of pronouncement of 
talaq ; (2) no reasons and justification of talaq ; amd 
(3) no plea or proof that talaq  was preceded by 
efforts towards reconciliation), the Supreme Court 
held that the marriage was not dissolved and that 
the liability of the husband to pay maintenance 
continued. Thus, after Shamim Ara  (supra), the 
position of the law relating to talaq , where it is 
contested by either spouse, is that, if it has to t ake 
effect, first of all the pronouncement of talaq  must 
be proved (it is not sufficient to merely state in 
court in a written statement or in some other 
pleading that  talaq was given at some earlier 
point of time), then reasonable cause must be 
shown as also the attempt at reconciliation must 
be demonstrated to have taken place… .” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
22.  As recently as in 2016, Mustaque, J. of the High Co urt of Kerala 
in Nazeer @ Oyoor Nazeer  v. Shemeema 65 , has inter  alia  
referred to Shamim Ara  and has disapproved triple talaq.  
 
                                                 
65  2017 (1) KLT 300 297 23.   Therefore, I find it extremely difficult to agree with the learned 
Chief Justice that the practice of triple talaq has  to be considered 
integral to the religious denomination in question and that the 
same is part of their personal law.  
24.  To freely profess, practice and propagate religion of one’s choice 
is a Fundamental Right guaranteed under the Indian Constitution. 
That is subject only to the following- (1) public o rder, (2) health, 
(3) morality and (4) other provisions of Part III d ealing with 
Fundamental Rights. Under Article 25 (2) of the Con stitution of 
India, the State is also granted power to make law in two 
contingencies notwithstanding the freedom granted u nder Article 
25(1). Article 25 (2) states that “nothing in this Article shall affect 
the operation of any existing law or prevent the St ate from making 
any law- (a) regulating or restricting any economic , financial, 
political or other secular activity which may be as sociated with 
religious practice; (b) providing for social welfar e and reform or 
the throwing open of Hindu religious institutions o f a public 
character to all classes and sections of Hindus.” E xcept to the 
above extent, the freedom of religion under the Con stitution of 
India is absolute and on this point, I am in full a greement with the 
learned Chief Justice. However, on the statement th at triple talaq 
is an integral part of the religious practice, I re spectfully disagree. 298 Merely because a practice has continued for long, t hat by itself 
cannot make it valid if it has been expressly decla red to be 
impermissible. The whole purpose of the 1937 Act wa s to declare 
Shariat as the rule of decision and to discontinue anti-Shariat 
practices with respect to subjects enumerated in Se ction 2 which 
include talaq. Therefore, in any case, after the in troduction of the 
1937 Act, no practice against the tenets of Quran i s permissible. 
Hence, there cannot be any Constitutional protectio n to such a 
practice and thus, my disagreement with the learned  Chief Justice 
for the constitutional protection given to triple t alaq. I also have 
serious doubts as to whether, even under Article 14 2, the exercise 
of a Fundamental Right can be injuncted. 
 
25.  When issues of such nature come to the forefront, t he discourse 
often takes the form of pitting religion against ot her constitutional 
rights. I believe that a reconciliation between the  same is 
possible, but the process of harmonizing different interests is 
within the powers of the legislature. Of course, th is power has to 
be exercised within the constitutional parameters w ithout curbing 
the religious freedom guaranteed under the Constitu tion of India. 
However, it is not for the Courts to direct for any  legislation. 299 26.  Fortunately, this Court has done its part in Shamim Ara . I 
expressly endorse and re-iterate the law declared i n  Shamim 
Ara . What is held to be bad in the Holy Quran cannot be good in 
Shariat and, in that sense, what is bad in theology  is bad in law as 
well. 
 
..……………………J. 
                (KURIAN JOSEPH) 
New Delhi; 
August 22, 2017. 300 REPORTABLE 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
SUO MOTU WRIT (CIVIL) No. 2 of 2015  
  
IN RE: MUSLIM WOMEN’S QUEST   
FOR EQUALITY                   …PETITIONER 
 
VERSUS 
JAMIAT ULMA-I-HIND & ORS          ...RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 118 of 2016  
 
SHAYARA BANO                               …PETITON ER 
 
VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS. MINISTRY 
OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT  
SECRETARY AND ORS.                  ...RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 288 of 2016  
 
AAFREEN REHMAN              …PETITIONER  
 
VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.       …RESPONDENTS 
 
 
 
 
WITH 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 327 of 2016  
 
GULSHAN PARVEEN            …PETITIONER 301 VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA REPRESENTED BY  
THE SECRETARY AND ORS.    …RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 665 of 2016  
 
ISHRAT JAHAN            …PETITIONER 
 
VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA MINISTRY OF  
WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT  
REPRESENTED BY THE SECRETARY  
AND ORS.                                …RESPONDENT S 
 
WITH 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 43 of 2017  
 
ATIYA SABRI                    …PETITIONER 
 
VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA REPRESENTED  
BY THE SECRETARY AND ORS.   …RESPONDENTS  
 
 
 
     J U D G M E N T  
 
 
R.F. Nariman, J.  
 
 
 Having perused a copy of the learned Chief Justice ’s 
judgment,  I am in respectful disagreement with the  
same. 302 1. This matter has found its way to a Constitution 
Bench of this Court because of certain newspaper 
articles which a Division Bench of this Court in 
Prakash v.  Phulavati , (2016) 2 SCC 36, adverted to, 
and then stated: 
“28. An important issue of gender 
discrimination which though not directly 
involved in this appeal, has been raised by 
some of the learned counsel for the parties 
which concerns rights of Muslim women. 
Discussions on gender discrimination led to 
this issue also. It was pointed out that in 
spite of guarantee of the Constitution, 
Muslim women are subjected to 
discrimination. There is no safeguard 
against arbitrary divorce and second 
marriage by her husband during currency 
of the first marriage, resulting in denial of 
dignity and security to her. Although the 
issue was raised before this Court 
in Ahmedabad Women Action Group 
(AWAG)  v. Union of India  [Ahmedabad 
Women Action Group (AWAG)  v. Union of 
India , (1997) 3 SCC 573], this Court did not 
go into the merits of the discrimination with 
the observation that the issue involved 
State policy to be dealt with by the 
legislature. [This Court referred to the 
observations of Sahai, J. in Sarla 
Mudgal v. Union of India , (1995) 3 SCC 
635 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 569 that a climate 
was required to be built for a uniform civil 
code. Reference was also made to 
observations in Madhu Kishwar  v. State of 
Bihar , (1996) 5 SCC 125 to the effect that 
the Court could at best advise and focus 
attention to the problem instead of playing 
an activist role.] It was observed that 
challenge to the Muslim Women (Protection 
of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 was 303 pending before the Constitution Bench and 
there was no reason to multiply 
proceedings on such an issue. 
31. It was, thus, submitted that this aspect 
of the matter may be gone into by 
separately registering the matter as public 
interest litigation (PIL). We are of the view 
that the suggestion needs consideration in 
view of the earlier decisions of this Court. 
The issue has also been highlighted in 
recent articles appearing in the press on 
this subject. [ The Tribune  dated 24-9-2015 
“Muslim Women’s Quest for Equality” by 
Vandana Shukla and Sunday Express 
Magazine dated 4-10-2015 “In Her Court” 
by Dipti Nagpaul D’Souza.] 
32. For this purpose, a PIL be separately 
registered and put up before the 
appropriate Bench as per orders of Hon’ble 
the Chief Justice of India.” 
(at pages 53 and 55) 
 
        Several writ petitions have thereafter been  filed 
and are before us seeking in different forms the sa me 
relief – namely, that a Triple Talaq at one go by a  
Muslim husband which severs the marital bond is bad  
in constitutional law.   
2. Wide ranging arguments have been made by various  
counsel appearing for the parties.  These have been  
referred to in great detail in the judgment of the learned 
Chief Justice.  In essence, the petitioners, suppor ted 304 by the Union of India, state that Triple Talaq is a n 
anachronism in today’s day and age and, 
constitutionally speaking, is anathema. Gender 
discrimination is put at the forefront of the argum ent, 
and it is stated that even though Triple Talaq may be 
sanctioned by the Shariat law as applicable to Sunn i 
Muslims in India, it is violative of Muslim women’s  
fundamental rights to be found, more particularly, in 
Articles 14, 15(1) and 21 of the Constitution of In dia.  
Opposing this, counsel for the Muslim Personal Boar d 
and others who supported them, then relied heavily 
upon a Bombay High Court judgment, being State of 
Bombay  v. Narasu Appa Mali , AIR 1952 Bom 84, for 
the proposition that personal laws are beyond the p ale 
of the fundamental rights Chapter of the Constituti on 
and hence cannot be struck down by this Court.  
According to them, in this view of the matter, this  Court 
should fold its hands and send Muslim women and 
other women’s organisations back to the legislature , as 
according to them, if Triple Talaq is to be removed  as a 
measure of social welfare and reform under Article 
25(2), the legislature alone should do so.  To this , the 
counter argument of the other side is that Muslim 305 personal laws are not being attacked as such.  What  is 
the subject matter of attack in these matters is a 
statute, namely, the Muslim Personal Law ( Shariat ) 
Application Act, 1937 (hereinafter referred to as t he 
“1937 Act”).  According to them, Triple Talaq is 
specifically sanctioned by statutory law vide  Section 2 
of the 1937 Act and what is sought for is a declara tion 
that Section 2 of the 1937 Act is constitutionally invalid 
to the aforesaid extent.  To this, the Muslim Perso nal 
Board states that Section 2 is not in order to appl y the 
Muslim law of Triple Talaq, but is primarily intend ed to 
do away with custom or usage to the contrary, as th e 
non-obstante clause in Section 2 indicates.  Theref ore, 
according to them, the Muslim personal law of Tripl e 
Talaq operates of its own force and cannot be inclu ded 
in Article 13(1) as “laws in force” as has been hel d in 
Narasu Appa (supra).  
  
3. The question, therefore, posed before this Court  is 
finally in a very narrow compass. Triple Talaq alon e is 
the subject matter of challenge – other forms of Ta laq 
are not.  The neat question that arises before this  Court 
is, therefore, whether the 1937 Act can be said to 306 recognize and enforce Triple Talaq as a rule of law  to 
be followed by the Courts in India and if not wheth er 
Narasu Appa (supra) which states that personal laws 
are outside Article 13(1) of the Constitution is co rrect in 
law.  
 
4. Inasmuch as the Muslims in India are divided int o 
two main sects, namely Sunnis and Shias, and this 
case pertains only to Sunnis as Shias do not recogn ize 
Triple Talaq, it is important to begin at the very 
beginning.  
 
5. In a most illuminating introduction to Mulla’s 
Principles of Mahomedan Law (16 th  Ed.) (1968), 
Justice Hidayatullah, after speaking about Prophet 
Mahomed, has this to say: 
 
“The Prophet had established himself as 
the supreme overlord and the supreme 
preceptor.  Arabia was steeped in 
ignorance and barbarism, superstition and 
vice.  Female infanticide, drinking, lechery 
and other vices were rampant. 
 
However, the Prophet did not nominate a 
successor.  His death was announced by 
Abu Bakr and immediate action was taken 
to hold an election.  As it happened, the 307 Chiefs of the tribe of Banu Khazraj were 
holding a meeting to elect a Chief and the 
Companions went to the place. This 
meeting elected Abu Bakr as the 
successor. The next day Abu Bakr 
ascended the pulpit and everyone took an 
oath of allegiance ( Bai’at).   
 
This election led to the great schism 
between the Sunnis and Shias. The 
Koreish tribe was divided into Ommayads 
and Hashimites. The Hashimites were 
named after Hashim the great grand-father 
of the Prophet.  There was bitter enmity 
between the Ommayads and the 
Hashimites. The Hashimites favoured the 
succession of Ali and claimed that he ought 
to have been chosen because of 
appointment by the Prophet and 
propinquity to him. The election in fact took 
place when the household of the Prophet 
(including Ali) was engaged in the 
obsequies.  This offended the Hashimites.  
It may, however, be said that Ali, 
regardless of his own claims, immediately 
swore allegiance to Abu Bakr.  Ali was not 
set up when the second and third elections 
of Omar and Osman took place, but he 
never went against these decisions and 
accepted the new Caliph each time and 
gave him unstinted support. 
 
Abu Bakr was sixty years old and was 
Caliph only for two years (d. 634 A.D.).  
Even when he was Caliph, the power 
behind him was Omar Ibnul Khattab. It is 
said that Abu Bakr named Omar as his 
successor.  Even if this be not true, it is 
obvious that the election was a mere 
formality. Omar was assassinated after ten 
years as Caliph (644 A.D.).  Osman was 
elected as the third Caliph.  Tradition is that 308 Omar had formed an inner panel of electors 
(six in number), but this is discountenanced 
by some leading historians.  Later this 
tradition was used by the Abbasids to form 
an inner conclave for their elections.  This 
special election used to be accepted by the 
people at a general, but somewhat formal, 
election.  Osman was Caliph for 12 years 
and was assassinated (656 A.D.).  Ali was 
at last elected as the fourth Caliph.  The 
election of the first four Caliphs, who are 
known as Khulfai-i-Rashidin (rightly-guided 
Caliphs) was real, although it may be said 
that each time the choice was such as to 
leave no room for opposition.  Ali was 
Caliph for five years.  He was killed in battle 
in 661 A.D.  Ali’s son Hasan resigned in 
favour of Muavia the founder of the 
Ommayad dynasty.  Hasan was, however, 
murdered. The partisans of Ali persuaded 
Hussain, the second son of Ali, to revolt 
against Mauvia’s son Yezid, but at Kerbala, 
Husain died fighting after suffering great 
privations.  The rift between the Sunnis and 
the Shias ( Shiat-i-Ali  party of Ali) became 
very great thereafter.” 
 
6. It is in this historical setting that it is nece ssary to 
advert to the various sub-sects of the Sunnis.  Fou r 
major sub-sects are broadly recognized schools of 
Sunni law.  They are the Hanafi school, Maliki scho ol, 
Shafi’i school and Hanbali school.  The overwhelmin g 
majority of Sunnis in India follow the Hanafi schoo l of 
law.  Mulla in Principles of Mahomedan Law (20 th  Ed.), 
pg. xix to xxi, has this to say about the Hanafi sc hool: 309 “This is the most famous of the four schools 
of Hanafi law.  This school was founded by 
Abu Hanifa (699-767 A.D.).  The school is 
also known as “Kufa School”.  Although 
taught by the great Imam Jafar-as-Sadik, 
the founder of the Shia School, Abu Hanifa 
was, also a pupil of Abu Abdullah ibn-ul-
Mubarak and Hamid bin-Sulaiman and this 
may account for his founding a separate 
school.  This school was favoured by the 
Abbasid Caliphs and its doctrines spread 
far and wide.  Abu Hanifa earned the 
appellation “The Great Imam”.   The school 
was fortunate in possessing, besides Abu 
Hanifa, his two more celebrated pupils, Abu 
Yusuf (who became the Chief Kazi at 
Baghdad) and Imam Muhammad Ash-
Shaybani, a prolific writer, who has left 
behind a number of books on 
jurisprudence.  The founder of the school 
himself left very little written work.  The 
home of this school was Iraq but it shares 
this territory with other schools although 
there is a fair representation.  The Ottoman 
Turks and the Seljuk Turks were Hanafis.  
The doctrines of this school spread to 
Syria, Afghanistan, Turkish Central Asia 
and India.  Other names connected with the 
Kufa School are Ibn Abi Layla and Safyan 
Thawri.  Books on the doctrines are al-
Hidaay  of Marghinani (translated by 
Hamilton), Radd-al-Mukhtar  and Durr-ul-
Mukhtar  of Ibn Abidin and al-Mukhtasar  of 
Kuduri.  The Fatawa-i-Alamgiri collected in 
Aurangzeb’s time contain the doctrines of 
this school with other material.” 
 
7. Needless to add, the Hanafi school has supported  
the practice of Triple Talaq amongst the Sunni Musl ims 
in India for many centuries. 310 8. Marriage in Islam is a contract, and like other 
contracts, may under certain circumstances, be 
terminated.  There is something astonishingly moder n 
about this – no public declaration is a condition 
precedent to the validity of a Muslim marriage nor is 
any religious ceremony deemed absolutely essential,  
though they are usually carried out.  Apparently, b efore 
the time of Prophet Mahomed, the pagan Arab was 
absolutely free to repudiate his wife on a mere whi m, 
but after the advent of Islam, divorce was permitte d to 
a man if his wife by her indocility or bad characte r 
renders marital life impossible.  In the absence of  good 
reason, no man can justify a divorce for he then dr aws 
upon himself the curse of God.  Indeed, Prophet 
Mahomed had declared divorce to be the most dislike d 
of lawful things in the sight of God.  The reason f or this 
is not far to seek.  Divorce breaks the marital tie  which 
is fundamental to family life in Islam.  Not only d oes it 
disrupt the marital tie between man and woman, but it 
has severe psychological and other repercussions on  
the children from such marriage. 311 9.     This then leads us to the forms of divorce 
recognized in Islamic Law.  Mulla (supra), at pages 
393-395,  puts it thus:  
“S. 311. Different modes of talak . – A talak 
may be effected in any of the following 
ways:- 
(1) Talak ahsan. – This consists of a 
single  pronouncement of divorce made 
during a tuhr  (period between 
menstruations) followed by abstinence from 
sexual intercourse for the period of iddat . 
When the marriage has not been 
consummated, a talak in the ahsan form 
may be pronounced even if the wife is in 
her menstruation.  
Where the wife has passed the age of 
periods of menstruation the requirement of 
a declaration during a tuhr  is inapplicable; 
furthermore, this requirement only applies 
to a oral divorce and not a divorce in 
writing. 
Talak Ahsan is based on the following 
verses of Holy Quran: “and the divorced 
woman should keep themselves in waiting 
for three courses.” (II:228). 
“And those of your woman who despair 
of menstruation, if you have a doubt, 
their prescribed time is three months, 
and of those too, who have not had 
their courses.” (LXV: 4). 
(2) Talak hasan-  This consists of three 
pronouncements made during successive  
tuhrs , no intercourse taking place during 
any of the three tuhrs. 312          The first pronouncement should be 
made during a tuhr , the second during the 
next tuhr , and the third during the 
succeeding tuhr. 
 Talak Hasan is based on the following 
Quranic injunctions: 
“Divorce may be pronounced twice, 
then keep them in good fellowship or 
let (them) go kindness.” (II: 229).   
 
“So if he (the husband) divorces her 
(third time) she shall not be lawful to 
him afterward until she marries another 
person.” (II: 230).   
(3)    Talak-ul-bidaat or talak-i-badai.-  This 
consists of – 
 
(i) Three pronouncements made during a 
single tuhr  either in one sentence, 
e.g., “I divorce thee thrice, ” - or in 
separate sentences e.g., “I divorce 
thee, I divorce thee, I divorce thee”, 
or  
 
(ii) a single  pronouncement made during 
a tuhr  clearly indicating an intention 
irrevocably to dissolve the marriage, 
e.g., “I divorce thee irrevocably.” 
 
Talak-us-sunnat and talak-ul-biddat 
The Hanafis recognized two kinds of talak, 
namely, (1) talak-us-sunnat, that is, talak  
according to the rules laid down in the 
sunnat (traditions) of the Prophet; and (2) 
talak-ul-biddat, that is, new or irregular 
talak .  Talak-ul-biddat  was introduced by 
the Omeyyade monarchs in the second 
century of the Mahomedan era.  Talak-ul-
sunnat  is of two kinds, namely, (1) ahsan, 313 that is, most proper, and (2) hasan, that is, 
proper.  The talak-ul-biddat or heretical 
divorce is good in law, though bad in 
theology  and it is the most common and 
prevalent mode of divorce in this country, 
including Oudh.  In the case of talak ahsan 
and talak hasan, the husband has an 
opportunity of reconsidering his decision, 
for the talak in both these cases does not 
become absolute until a certain period has 
elapsed (S.312), and the husband has the 
option to revoke it before then.  But the 
talak-ul-biddat becomes irrevocable 
immediately it is pronounced (S.312).  The 
essential feature of a talak-ul-biddat is its 
irrevocability.  One of tests of irrevocability 
is the repetition three times of the formula 
of divorce within one tuhr.   But the triple 
repetition is not a necessary condition of 
talak-ul-biddat, and the intention to render a 
talak irrevocable may be expressed even 
by a single  declaration.  Thus if a man says 
“I have divorced you by a talak-ul-bain 
(irrevocable divorce)”, the talak  is talak-ul-
biddat  or talak-i-badai  and it will take effect 
immediately it is pronounced, though it may 
be pronounced but once.  Here the use of 
the expression “ bain ” (irrevocable) 
manifests of itself the intention to effect an 
irrevocable divorce.” 
    
 [Emphasis Supplied] 
 
10. Another noted author, A.A.A. Fyzee, in his 
book “Outlines of Muhammadan Law” (5 th  Ed.), at 
pages 120-122, puts it thus: 
“The pronouncement of talaq  may be either 
revocable or irrevocable.  As the Prophet of 
Islam did not favour the institution of talaq , 
the revocable forms of talaq  are considered 
as the ‘approved’ and the irrevocable forms 
are treated as the ‘disapproved’ forms.  A 314 revocable pronouncement of divorce gives 
a locus  poenitentiae  to the man; but an 
irrevocable pronouncement leads to an 
undesirable result without a chance to 
reconsider the question.  If this principle is 
kept in mind the terminology is easily 
understood.  The forms of talaq  may be 
classified as follows: 
(a) talaq al-sunna  (i.e., in conformity with the 
dictates of the Prophet) –  
(i) ahsan  (the most approved), (ii) hasan  
(approved).  
(b) talaq al-bid’a  (i.e., of innovation; 
therefore not approved)  – (i) three 
declarations (the so-called triple divorce) at 
one time, (ii) one irrevocable declaration 
(generally in writing).  
The talaq al-sunna , most approved form 
consists of one single pronouncement in a 
period of tuhr  (purity, i.e., when the woman 
is free from her menstrual courses), 
followed by abstinence from sexual 
intercourse during that period of sexual 
purity ( tuhr ) as well as during the whole of 
the iddat .  If any such intercourse takes 
place during the periods mentioned, the 
divorce is void and of no effect in Ithna 
Ashari and Fatimi laws.  It is this mode or 
procedure which seems to have been 
approved by the Prophet at the beginning 
of his ministry and is consequently 
regarded as the regular or proper and 
orthodox form of divorce.   
Where the parties have been away from 
each other for a long time, or where the 
wife is old and beyond the age of 
menstruation, the condition of tuhr  is 
unnecessary.  
A pronouncement made in the ashan  form 
is revocable during iddat .  This period is 
three months from the date of the 
declaration or, if the woman is pregnant, 
until delivery.  The husband may revoke the 
divorce at any time during the iddat .  Such 315 revocation may be by express words or by 
conduct.  Resumption of conjugal 
intercourse is a clear case of revocation.  
For instance, H pronounces a single 
revocable talaq  against his wife and then 
says ‘I have retained thee’ or cohabits with 
her, the divorce is revoked under Hanafi as 
well as Ithna Ashari law.  After the 
expiration of the iddat  the divorce becomes 
irrevocable.  
A Muslim wife after divorce is entitled to 
maintenance during the iddat , and so also 
her child in certain circumstances.  
The hasan  form of talaq , also an approved 
form but less approved than the first 
(ahsan ), consists of three successive 
pronouncements during three consecutive 
periods of purity ( tuhr ).  Each of these 
pronouncements should have been made 
at a time when no intercourse has taken 
place during that particular period of purity.   
The hasan  form of talaq  requires some 
explanation and a concrete illustration 
should suffice.  The husband (H) 
pronounces talaq  on his wife (W) for the 
first time during a period when W is free 
from her menstrual courses.  The husband 
and wife had not come together during this 
period of purity.  This is the first talaq. H 
resumes cohabitation or revokes this first 
talaq  in this period of purity.  Thereafter in 
the following period of purity, at a time 
when no intercourse has taken place, H 
pronounces the second talaq .  This talaq is 
again revoked by express words or by 
conduct and the third period of purity is 
entered into.  In this period, while no 
intercourse having taken place, H for the 
third time pronounces the formula of 
divorce.   This third pronouncement 
operates in law as a final and irrevocable 
dissolution of the marital tie.  The marriage 
is dissolved; sexual intercourse becomes 
unlawful; iddat  becomes incumbent; 
remarriage between the parties becomes 316 impossible unless W lawfully marries 
another husband, and that other husband 
lawfully divorces her after the marriage has 
been actually consummated.  
Thus it is clear that in these two forms there 
is a chance for the parties to be reconciled 
by the intervention of friends or otherwise.  
They are, therefore, the ‘approved’ forms 
and are recognized both by Sunni and Shia 
laws.  The Ithna Ashari and the Fatimi 
schools, however, do not recognize the 
remaining two forms and thus preserve the 
ancient conventions of the times of the 
Law-giver.  
The first, or ahsan , form is ‘most approved’ 
because the husband behaves in a 
gentlemanly manner and does not treat the 
wife as a chattel.  The second is a form in 
which the Prophet tried to put an end to a 
barbarous pre-Islamic practice.  This 
practice was to divorce a wife and take her 
back several times in order to ill-treat her.  
The Prophet, by the rule of the irrevocability 
of the third pronouncement, indicated 
clearly that such a practice could not be 
continued indefinitely. Thus if a husband 
really wished to take the wife back he 
should do so; if not, the third 
pronouncement after two reconciliations 
would operate as a final bar.  These rules 
of law follow the spirit of the Quranic 
injunction: ‘when they have reached their 
term take them back in kindness or part 
from them in kindness’. 
A disapproved form of divorce is talaq  by 
triple declarations in which three 
pronouncements are made in a single tuhr , 
either in one sentence e.g. ‘I divorce thee 
triply or thrice’ or in three sentences ‘I 
divorce thee, I divorce thee, I divorce thee.’ 
Such a talaq  is lawful, although sinful, in 
Hanafi law ; but in Ithna Ashari and the 
Fatimi laws it is not permissible.  This is 
called talaq al-ba’in , irrevocable divorce. 317 Another form of the disapproved divorce is 
a single, irrevocable pronouncement made 
either during the period of tuhr  or even 
otherwise.  This form is also called talaq al-
ba’in  and may be given in writing.  Such a 
‘bill of divorcement’ comes into operation 
immediately and severs the marital tie.  
This form is not recognized by the Ithna 
Ashari or the Fatimi schools.” 
    
 [Emphasis Supplied]  
 
11.   It is at this stage that the 1937 Act needs 
consideration.  The Statement of Objects and Reason s 
of this Act are as follows: 
“For several years past it has been the 
cherished desire of the Muslims of British 
India that Customary Law should in no 
case take the place of Muslim Personal 
Law. The matter has been repeatedly 
agitated in the press as well as on the 
platform. The Jamiat-ul-Ulema-i-Hind, the 
greatest Moslem religious body has 
supported the demand and invited the 
attention of all concerned to the urgent 
necessity of introducing a measure to this 
effect. Customary Law is a misnomer in as 
much as it has not any sound basis to 
stand upon and is very much liable to 
frequent changes and cannot be expected 
to attain at any time in the future that 
certainty and definiteness which must be 
the characteristic of all laws. The status of 
Muslim women under the so-called 
Customary Law is simply disgraceful. All 
the Muslim Women Organisations have 
therefore condemned the Customary Law 
as it adversely affects their rights. They 
demand that the Muslim Personal Law 
(Shariat ) should be made applicable to 
them . The introduction of Muslim Personal 
Law will automatically raise them to the 318 position to which they are naurally entitled. 
In addition to this present measure, if 
enacted, would have very salutary effect 
on society because it would ensure 
certainty and definiteness in the mutual 
rights and obligations of the public. Muslim 
Personal Law ( Shariat ) exists in the form 
of a veritable code and is too well known to 
admit of any doubt or to entail any great 
labour in the shape of research, which is 
the chief feature of Customary Law.” 
    
 [Emphasis Supplied]  
 
12. It is a short Act consisting of 6 Sections.  We  
are directly concerned in these cases with Section 2.  
Section 2 of the 1937 Act states: 
“2. Application of Personal law to 
Muslims. - Notwithstanding any custom or 
usage to the contrary, in all questions (save 
questions relating to agricultural land) 
regarding intestate succession, special 
property of females, including personal 
properly inherited or obtained under 
contract or gift or any other provision of 
Personal Law, marriage, dissolution of 
marriage, including talaq , ila , zihar , lian , 
khula  and mubaraat , maintenance, dower, 
guardianship, gifts, trusts and trust 
properties, and wakfs  (other than charities 
and charitable institutions and charitable 
and religious endowments) the rule of 
decision in cases where the parties are 
Muslims shall be the Muslim Personal Law 
(Shariat ).” 
 
13. A word as to the meaning of the expression 
“Shariat”. A.A.A. Fyzee (supra), at pages 9-11, 
describes “Shariat” as follows: 319 “Coming to law proper, it is necessary to 
remember that there are two different 
conceptions of law.  Law may be considered 
to be of divine origin, as is the case with the 
Hindu law and the Islamic law, or it may be 
conceived as man-made.  The latter 
conception is the guiding principle of all 
modern legislation; it is, as Ostrorog has 
pointed out, the Greek, Roman, Celtic or 
Germanic notion of law.  We may be 
compelled to act in accordance with certain 
principles because God desires us to do so, 
or in the alternative because the King or the 
Assembly of wise men or the leader of the 
community or social custom demand it of 
us, for the good of the people in general.  In 
the case of Hindu law, it is based first on the 
Vedas or Sruti (that which is heard); 
secondly on the Smriti (that which is 
remembered by the sages or rishis ).  
Although the effect of custom is undoubtedly 
great yet dharma , as defined by Hindu 
lawyers, implies a course of conduct which 
is approved by God.  
Now, what is the Islamic notion of law? In 
the words of Justice Mahmood, ‘It is to be 
remembered that Hindu and Muhammadan 
law are so intimately connected with 
religion that they cannot readily be 
dissevered from it’.  There is in Islam a 
doctrine of ‘certitude’ ( ilm al-yaqin ) in the 
matter of Good and Evil.  We in our 
weakness cannot understand what Good 
and Evil are unless we are guided in the 
matter by an inspired Prophet.  Good and 
Evil – husn  (beauty) and qubh  (ugliness) – 
are to be taken in the ethical acceptation of 
the terms.  What is morally beautiful that 
must be done; and what is morally ugly 
must not be done.  That is law or Shariat  
and nothing else can be law.  But what is 
absolutely and indubitably beautiful, and 
what is absolutely and indubitably ugly?  
These are the important legal questions; 
and who can answer them? Certainly not 320 man, say the Muslim legists.  We have the 
Qur’an which is the very word of God.  
Supplementary to it we have Hadith  which 
are Traditions of the Prophet – the records 
of his actions and his sayings – from which 
we must derive help and inspiration in 
arriving at legal decisions.  If there is 
nothing either in the Qur’an or in the Hadith 
to answer the particular question which is 
before us, we have to follow the dictates of 
secular reason in accordance with certain 
definite principles.  These principles 
constitute the basis of sacred law or Shariat  
as the Muslim doctors understand it.  And it 
is these fundamental juristic notions which 
we must try to study and analyse before we 
approach the study of the Islamic civil law 
as a whole, or even that small part of it 
which in India is known as Muslim law.  
Modern jurists emphasize the importance 
of law for understanding the character and 
ethos of a people.  Law, says a modern 
jurist, ‘streams from the soul of a people 
like national poetry, it is as holy as the 
national religion, it grows and spreads like 
language; religious, ethical, and poetical 
elements all contribute to its vital force’; it is 
‘the distilled essence of the civilization of a 
people’; it reflects the people’s soul more 
clearly than any other organism.  This is 
true of Islam more than of any other faith.  
The Shari’at  is the central core of Islam; no 
understanding of its civilization, its social 
history or its political system, is possible 
without a knowledge and appreciation of its 
legal system.  
Shariat  (lit., the road to the watering place, 
the path to be followed) as a technical term 
means the Canon law of Islam, the totality 
of Allah’s commandments.  Each one of 
such commandments is called hukm  (pl. 
ahkam ).  The law of Allah and its inner 
meaning is not easy to grasp; and Shariat  
embraces all human actions.  For this 
reason it is not ‘law’ in the modern sense; it 321 contains an infallible guide to ethics.  It is 
fundamentally a Doctrine of Duties, a code 
of obligations. Legal considerations and 
individual rights have a secondary place in 
it; above all the tendency towards a 
religious evaluation of all the affairs of life is 
supreme.  
According to the Shariat  religious 
injunctions are of five kinds, al-ahkam al-
khamsah .  Those strictly enjoined are farz , 
and those strictly forbidden are haram . 
Between them we have two middle 
categories, namely, things which you are 
advised to do ( mandub ), and things which 
you are advised to refrain from ( makruh ) 
and finally there are things about which 
religion is indifferent ( ja’iz ).  The daily 
prayers, five in number, are farz ; wine is 
haram ; the addition prayers like those on 
the Eid  are mandub ; certain kinds of fish 
are makruh ; and there are thousands of 
ja’iz  things such as travelling by air.  Thus 
the Shariat  is totalitarian; all human activity 
is embraced in its sovereign domain.  This 
fivefold division must be carefully noted; for 
unless this is done it is impossible to 
understand the distinction between that 
which is only morally enjoined and that 
which is legally enforced. Obviously, moral 
obligation is quite a different thing from 
legal necessity and if in law these 
distinctions are not kept in mind error and 
confusion are the inevitable result.” 
 
14. It can be seen that the 1937 Act is a pre-
constitutional legislative measure which would fall  
directly within Article 13(1) of the Constitution o f India, 
which reads as under: 
“Article 13 - Laws inconsistent with or in 
derogation of the fundamental rights - 
(1) All laws in force in the territory of India 322 immediately before the commencement of 
this Constitution, in so far as they are 
inconsistent with the provisions of this part, 
shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, 
be void. 
(2) xxx xxx xxx 
(3) In this article, unless the context 
otherwise requires,- 
(a) “law” includes any Ordinance, order, 
bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, 
custom or usage having in the territory of 
India the force of law; 
(b) “laws in force” includes laws passed or 
made by a Legislature or other competent 
authority in the territory of India before the 
commencement of this Constitution and not 
previously repealed, notwithstanding that 
any such law or any part thereof may not 
be then in operation either at all or in 
particular areas.” 
 
15. However, learned counsel for the Muslim 
Personal Board as well as other counsel supporting 
their stand have argued that, read in light of the 
Objects and Reasons, the 1937 Act was not meant to 
enforce Muslim personal law, which was enforceable 
by itself through the Courts in India. The 1937 Act  was 
only meant, as the non-obstante clause in Section 2  
indicates, to do away with custom or usage which is  
contrary to Muslim personal law.   
 
16. We are afraid that such a constricted reading 
of the statute would be impermissible in law. True,  the 
Objects and Reasons of a statute throw light on the 323 background in which the statute was enacted, but it  is 
difficult to read the non-obstante clause of Sectio n 2 as 
governing the enacting part of the Section, or othe rwise 
it will become a case of the tail wagging the dog.  A 
similar attempt was made many years ago and rejecte d 
in Aswini Kumar Ghosh v.  Arabinda Bose , 1953 
SCR 1.  This Court was concerned with Section 2 of 
the Supreme Court Advocates (Practice in High 
Courts) Act, 1951.   Section 2 of the said Act read  as 
follows: 
“Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, or in any 
other law regulating the conditions subject 
to which a person not entered in the roll of 
Advocates of a High Court may, be 
permitted to practice in that High Court 
every Advocate of the Supreme Court shall 
be entitled as of right to practice in any 
High Court whether or not he is an 
Advocate of that High Court: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall 
be deemed to entitle any person, merely by 
reason of his being an Advocate of the 
Supreme Court, to practice in any High 
Court of which he was at any time a judge, 
if he had given an undertaking not to 
practice therein after ceasing to hold office 
as such judge.” 
 
17. The argument made before this Court was 
that the non-obstante clause furnishes the key to t he 
proper interpretation of the scope of the Section a nd 324 the enacting clause must, therefore, be construed a s 
conferring only a right co-extensive with the disab ility 
removed by the opening clause.  This argument was 
rejected by this Court as follows: 
“23. Turning now to the non obstante 
clause in section 2 of the new Act, which 
appears to have furnished the whole basis 
for the reasoning of the Court below — and 
the argument before us closely followed 
that reasoning — we find the learned 
Judges begin by inquiring what are the 
provisions which that clause seeks to 
supersede and then place upon the 
enacting clause such construction as would 
make the right conferred by it co-extensive 
with the disability imposed by the 
superseded provisions. “The meaning of 
the section will become clearer”, they 
observe, “if we examine a little more closely 
what the section in fact supersedes or 
repeals.....The disability which the section 
removes and the right which it confers are 
co-extensive.” This is not, in our judgment, 
a correct approach to the construction of 
section 2. It should first be ascertained 
what the enacting part of the section 
provides on a fair construction of the words 
used according to their natural and ordinary 
meaning, and the non obstante  clause is to 
be understood as operating to set aside as 
no longer valid anything contained in 
relevant existing laws which is inconsistent 
with the new enactment.” 
(at pages 21-22) 
  
This view was followed in A.V. Fernandez v.  
State of Kerala,  1957 SCR 837 at 850. 325 18. It is, therefore, clear that all forms of Talaq  
recognized and enforced by Muslim personal law are 
recognized and enforced by the 1937 Act.  This woul d 
necessarily include Triple Talaq when it comes to t he 
Muslim personal law applicable to Sunnis in India.  
Therefore, it is very difficult to accept the argum ent on 
behalf of the Muslim Personal Board that Section 2 
does not recognize or enforce Triple Talaq.  It cle arly 
and obviously does both, because the Section makes 
Triple Talaq “the rule of decision in cases where t he 
parties are Muslims”. 
 
19. As we have concluded that the 1937 Act is a 
law made by the legislature before the Constitution  
came into force, it would fall squarely within the 
expression “laws in force” in Article 13(3)(b) and would 
be hit by Article 13(1) if found to be inconsistent  with 
the provisions of Part III of the Constitution, to the 
extent of such inconsistency. 
 
20. At this stage, it is necessary to refer to the 
recognition of Triple Talaq as a legal form of divo rce in 
India, as applicable to Sunni Muslims.  In an early  
Bombay case, Sarabai v.  Rabiabai , (1906) ILR 30 326 Bom 537, Bachelor, J. referred to Triple Talaq and said 
that “it is good in law though bad in theology”.  I n a 
Privy Council decision in 1932, 5 years before the 1937 
Act, namely Rashid Ahmad v.  Anisa Khatun , (1931-
32) 59 IA  21: AIR 1932 PC 25, the Privy Council was 
squarely called upon to adjudicate upon a Triple Ta laq.  
Lord Thankerton speaking for the Privy Council put it 
thus: 
“There is nothing in the case to suggest 
that the parties are not Sunni Mahomedans 
governed by the ordinary Hanafi law, and, 
in the opinion of their Lordships, the law of 
divorce applicable in such a case is 
correctly stated by Sir R.K Wilson, in his 
Digest of Anglo-Muhammadan Law, 5th 
ed., at p. 136, as follows: “The divorce 
called talak  may be either irrevocable ( bain ) 
or revocable ( raja ). A talak bain , while it 
always operates as an immediate and 
complete dissolution of the marriage bond, 
differs as to one of its ulterior effects 
according to the form in which it is 
pronounced. A talak bain  may be effected 
by words addressed to the wife clearly 
indicating an intention to dissolve the 
marriage, either:—( a) Once, followed by 
abstinence from sexual intercourse, for the 
period called the iddat ; or ( b) Three times 
during successive intervals of purity, i.e, 
between successive menstruations, no 
intercourse taking place during any of the 
three intervals; or ( c) Three times at shorter 
intervals, or even in immediate succession; 
or ( d) Once, by words showing a clear 
intention that the divorce shall immediately 
became irrevocable. The first-named of the 
above methods is called ahsan  (best), the 327 second hasan  (good), the third and fourth 
are said to be bidaat  (sinful), but are, 
nevertheless, regarded by Sunni lawyers 
as legally valid.”  
                                                       (at page 
26) 
The Privy Council went on to state: 
“Their Lordships are of opinion that the 
pronouncement of the triple talak by 
Ghiyas-ud-din constituted an immediately 
effective divorce, and, while they are 
satisfied that the High Court were not 
justified in such a conclusion on the 
evidence in the present case, they are of 
opinion that the validity and effectiveness of 
the divorce would not be affected by 
Ghiyas-ud-din’s mental intention that it 
should not be a genuine divorce, as such a 
view is contrary to all authority. A talak 
actually pronounced under compulsion or in 
jest is valid and effective: Baillie’s Digest, 
2nd ed., p. 208; Ameer Ali’s Mohammedan 
Law, 3rd ed., vol. ii., p. 518; Hamilton’s 
Hedaya, vol. i., p. 211.”  
(at page 27) 
 
21. It is thus clear that it is this view of the la w 
which the 1937 Act both recognizes and enforces so as 
to come within the purview of Article 13(1) of the 
Constitution.   
 
22. In this view of the matter, it is unnecessary f or us to 
decide whether the judgment in Narasu Appa (supra) 
is good law.  However, in a suitable case, it may b e 
necessary to have a re-look at this judgment in tha t the 
definition of “law” and “laws in force” are both in clusive 328 definitions, and that at least one part of the judg ment of 
P.B. Gajendragadkar, J., (para 26), in which the 
learned Judge opines that the expression “law” cann ot 
be read into the expression “laws in force” in Arti cle 
13(3) is itself no longer good law – See Sant Ram & 
Ors. v.  Labh Singh & Ors., (1964) 7 SCR 756. 
23. It has been argued somewhat faintly that 
Triple Talaq would be an essential part of the Isla mic 
faith and would, therefore, be protected by Article  25 of 
the Constitution of India.  Article 25 reads as fol lows: 
“Article 25 - Freedom of conscience and 
free profession, practice and 
propagation of religion.- 
(1) Subject to public order, morality and 
health and to the other provisions of this 
Part, all persons are equally entitled to 
freedom of conscience and the right freely 
to profess, practise and propagate religion. 
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the 
operation of any existing law or prevent the 
State from making any law— 
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, 
financial, political or other secular activity 
which may be associated with religious 
practice; 
(b) providing for social welfare and reform 
or the throwing open of Hindu religious 
institutions  of a public character to all 
classes and sections of Hindus. 
Explanation I.—The wearing and carrying 
of kirpans shall be deemed to be included 
in the profession of the Sikh religion. 
Explanation II.—In sub-clause (b) of clause 
(2), the reference to Hindus shall be 
construed as including a reference to 329 persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or 
Buddhist religion, and the reference to 
Hindu religious institutions shall be 
construed accordingly.” 
 
24. “Religion” has been given the widest 
possible meaning by this Court in Commissioner, 
Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras v.  Sri 
Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt , 
1954 SCR 1005 at 1023-1024. In this country, 
therefore, atheism would also form part of “religio n”. 
But one important caveat has been entered by this 
Court, namely, that only what is an essential relig ious 
practice is protected under Article 25.  A few deci sions 
have laid down what constitutes an essential religi ous 
practice. Thus, in Javed v.  State of Haryana , 2003 (8) 
SCC 369, this Court stated as under: 
“60. Looked at from any angle, the 
challenge to the constitutional validity of 
Section 175(1)( q) and Section 177(1) must 
fail. The right to contest an election for any 
office in Panchayat is neither fundamental 
nor a common law right. It is the creature of 
a statute and is obviously subject to 
qualifications and disqualifications enacted 
by legislation. It may be permissible for 
Muslims to enter into four marriages with 
four women and for anyone whether a 
Muslim or belonging to any other 
community or religion to procreate as many 
children as he likes but no religion in India 
dictates or mandates as an obligation to 
enter into bigamy or polygamy or to have 330 children more than one. What is permitted 
or not prohibited by a religion does not 
become a religious practice or a positive 
tenet of a religion. A practice does not 
acquire the sanction of religion simply 
because it is permitted. Assuming the 
practice of having more wives than one or 
procreating more children than one is a 
practice followed by any community or 
group of people, the same can be regulated 
or prohibited by legislation in the interest of 
public order, morality and health or by any 
law providing for social welfare and reform 
which the impugned legislation clearly 
does.” 
(at page 394) 
  
And in Commissioner of Police v.  Acharya 
Jagdishwarananda Avadhuta, 2004 (12) SCC 770, it 
was stated as under: 
“9. The protection guaranteed under 
Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution is not 
confined to matters of doctrine or belief but 
extends to acts done in pursuance of 
religion and, therefore, contains a 
guarantee for rituals, observances, 
ceremonies and modes of worship which 
are essential or integral part of religion. 
What constitutes an integral or essential 
part of religion has to be determined with 
reference to its doctrines, practices, tenets, 
historical background, etc. of the given 
religion. (See generally the Constitution 
Bench decisions in Commr., H.R.E.  v. Sri 
Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur 
Mutt  [AIR 1954 SC 282 : 1954 SCR 
1005], Sardar Syedna Taher Saifuddin 
Saheb  v. State of Bombay  [AIR 1962 SC 
853 : 1962 Supp (2) SCR 496] 
and Seshammal  v. State of T.N.  [(1972) 2 
SCC 11 : AIR 1972 SC 1586] regarding 
those aspects that are to be looked into so 331 as to determine whether a part or practice 
is essential or not.) What is meant by “an 
essential part or practices of a religion” is 
now the matter for elucidation. Essential 
part of a religion means the core beliefs 
upon which a religion is founded. Essential 
practice means those practices that are 
fundamental to follow a religious belief. It is 
upon the cornerstone of essential parts or 
practices that the superstructure of a 
religion is built, without which a religion will 
be no religion. Test to determine whether a 
part or practice is essential to a religion is 
to find out whether the nature of the religion 
will be changed without that part or 
practice. If the taking away of that part or 
practice could result in a fundamental 
change in the character of that religion or in 
its belief, then such part could be treated as 
an essential or integral part. There cannot 
be additions or subtractions to such part 
because it is the very essence of that 
religion and alterations will change its 
fundamental character. It is such 
permanent essential parts which are 
protected by the Constitution. Nobody can 
say that an essential part or practice of 
one’s religion has changed from a 
particular date or by an event. Such 
alterable parts or practices are definitely 
not the “core” of religion whereupon the 
belief is based and religion is founded 
upon. They could only be treated as mere 
embellishments to the non-essential 
(sic  essential) part or practices.” 
(at pages 782-783) 
 
25. Applying the aforesaid tests, it is clear that 
Triple Talaq is only a form of Talaq which is 
permissible in law, but at the same time, stated to  be 
sinful by the very Hanafi school which tolerates it . 332 According to Javed (supra), therefore, this would not 
form part of any essential religious practice. Appl ying 
the test stated in Acharya Jagdishwarananda 
(supra) , it is equally clear that the fundamental nature 
of the Islamic religion, as seen through an Indian Sunni 
Muslim’s eyes, will not change without this practic e. 
Indeed, Islam divides all human action into five ki nds, 
as has been stated by Hidayatullah, J. in his 
introduction to Mulla (supra).  There it is stated: 
“E.   Degrees of obedience : Islam divides all 
actions into five kinds which figure differently in  
the sight of God and in respect of which His 
Commands are different.  This plays an important 
part in the lives of Muslims. 
(i) First degree: Fard .  Whatever is 
commanded in the Koran, Hadis  or ijmaa 
must be obeyed. 
 
Wajib . Perhaps a little less compulsory than 
Fard  but only slightly less so. 
 
(ii) Second degree: Masnun, Mandub and 
Mustahab: These are recommended 
actions. 
 
(iii) Third degree: Jaiz or Mubah:  These are 
permissible actions as to which religion is 
indifferent. 
 
(iv) Fourth degree: Makruh: That which is 
reprobated as unworthy. 333 (v) Fifth degree: Haram: That which is 
forbidden.” 
 
        Obviously, Triple Talaq does not fall withi n the first 
degree, since even assuming that it forms part of t he 
Koran, Hadis or Ijmaa, it is not something 
“commanded”.  Equally Talaq itself is not a 
recommended action and, therefore, Triple Talaq wil l 
not fall within the second degree.  Triple Talaq at  best 
falls within the third degree, but probably falls m ore 
squarely within the fourth degree.  It will be 
remembered that under the third degree, Triple Tala q 
is a permissible action as to which religion is 
indifferent.  Within the fourth degree, it is repro bated as 
unworthy.  We have already seen that though 
permissible in Hanafi jurisprudence, yet, that very  
jurisprudence castigates Triple Talaq as being sinf ul.  It 
is clear, therefore, that Triple Talaq forms no par t of 
Article 25(1).  This being the case, the submission  on 
behalf of the Muslim Personal Board that the ball m ust 
be bounced back to the legislature does not at all arise 
in that Article 25(2)(b) would only apply if a part icular 
religious practice is first covered under Article 2 5(1) of 
the Constitution. 334  
26. And this brings us to the question as to when 
petitions have been filed under Article 32 of the 
Constitution of India, is it permissible for us to state that 
we will not decide an alleged breach of a fundament al 
right, but will send the matter back to the legisla ture to 
remedy such a wrong.  
 
27. In Prem Chand Garg v.  Excise 
Commissioner, U.P., 1963 (Supp.) 1 SCR 885, this 
Court held: 
“2. Article 32(1) provides that the right to 
move the Supreme Court by appropriate 
proceedings for the enforcement of the 
rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed, 
and sub-art. (4) lays down that this right 
shall not be suspended except as 
otherwise provided for by this Constitution. 
There is no doubt that the right to move this 
Court conferred on the citizens of this 
country by Article 32 is itself a guaranteed 
right and it holds the same place of pride in 
the Constitution as do the other provisions 
in respect of the citizens fundamental 
rights. The fundamental rights guaranteed 
by Part III which have been made 
justiciable, form the most outstanding and 
distinguishing feature of the Indian 
Constitution. It is true that the said rights 
are not absolute and they have to be 
adjusted in relation to the interests of the 
general public. But the scheme of Article 19 
illustrates, the difficult task of determining 
the propriety or the validity of adjustments 
made either legislatively or by executive 
action between the fundamental rights and 335 the demands of socio-economic welfare 
has been ultimately left in charge of the 
High Courts and the Supreme Court by the 
Constitution. It is in the light of this position 
that the Constitution makers thought it 
advisable to treat the citizen’s right to move 
this Court for the enforcement of their 
fundamental rights as being a fundamental 
right by itself. The fundamental right to 
move this Court can, therefore, be 
appropriately described as the corner-stone 
of the democratic edifice raised by the 
Constitution. That is why it is natural that 
this Court should, in the words of Patanjali 
Sastri J., regard itself “as the protector and 
guarantor of fundamental rights,” and 
should declare that “it cannot, consistently 
with the responsibility laid upon it, refuse to 
entertain applications seeking protection 
against infringements of such rights.” 
(Vide Romesh Thappar  v. State of 
Madras  [[1950] SCR 594 at 697]). In 
discharging the duties assigned to it, this 
Court has to play the role “of a sentinel on 
the qui vive ” (Vide State of Madras  v. V.C. 
Row [[1952] SCR 594 at 597]) and it must 
always regard it as its solemn duty to 
protect the said fundamental rights’ 
zealously and vigilantly 
(Vide Daryao  v. State of U.P.  [[1962] 1 
SCR 574 at p. 582])” 
 
28. We are heartened to note that in a recent 
U.S. Supreme Court decision the same thing has been  
said with respect to knocking at the doors of the U .S. 
Supreme Court in order to vindicate a basic right.  In 
Obergefell v.  Hodges, 135 S. Ct. 2584 at 2605, 
decided on June 26, 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court pu t 
it thus: 336 “The dynamic of our constitutional system 
is that individuals need not await legislative 
action before asserting a fundamental right.  
The Nation’s courts are open to injured 
individuals who come to them to vindicate 
their own direct, personal stake in our basic 
charter.  An individual can invoke a right to 
constitutional protection when he or she is 
harmed, even if the broader public 
disagrees and even if the legislature 
refuses to act. The idea of the Constitution 
“was to withdraw certain subjects from the 
vicissitudes of political controversy, to place 
them beyond the reach of majorities and 
officials and to establish them as legal 
principles to be applied by the courts.” 
West Virginia Bd. of Ed. v. Barnette , 319 
U.S. 624, 638 (1943).  This is why 
“fundamental rights may not be submitted 
to a vote; they depend on the outcome of 
no elections.” 
        
29. However, counsel for the Muslim Personal 
Board relied heavily on this Court’s decision in 
Ahmedabad Women Action Group  v. Union of 
India , (1997) 3 SCC 573.  This judgment refers to 
several earlier decisions to hold that the declarat ions 
sought for did not deserve disposal on merits, whic h 
involve issues of State policy that courts ordinari ly do 
not have concern with.  This Court, therefore, decl ined 
to entertain writ petitions that asked for very swe eping 
reliefs which, interestingly enough, included a 
declaration of voidness as to “unilateral talaq”.  This 337 Court referred in detail to the judgment of the Bom bay 
High Court in Narasu Appa (supra) in declining to 
review Muslim personal law.  However, when it came 
to the challenge of a statutory enactment, Muslim 
Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986, 
this Court did not wish to multiply proceedings in that 
behalf, as a challenge was pending before a 
Constitution Bench regarding the same. 
30. Hard as we tried, it is difficult to discover a ny 
ratio in this judgment, as one part of the judgment  
contradicts another part. If one particular statuto ry 
enactment is already under challenge, there is no 
reason why other similar enactments which were also  
challenged should not have been disposed of by this  
Court.  Quite apart from the above, it is a little difficult 
to appreciate such declination in the light of Prem 
Chand Garg (supra). This judgment, therefore, to the 
extent that it is contrary to at least two Constitu tion 
Bench decisions cannot possibly be said to be good 
law. 
31. It is at this point that it is necessary to see  
whether a fundamental right has been violated by th e 338 1937 Act insofar as it seeks to enforce Triple Tala q as 
a rule of law in the Courts in India.    
32. Article 14 of the Constitution of India is a 
facet of equality of status and opportunity spoken of in 
the Preamble to the Constitution.  The Article natu rally 
divides itself into two parts- (1) equality before the law, 
and (2) the equal protection of the law.  Judgments  of 
this Court have referred to the fact that the equal ity 
before law concept has been derived from the law in  
the U.K., and the equal protection of the laws has been 
borrowed from the 14 th  Amendment to the Constitution 
of the United States of America.  In a revealing 
judgment, Subba Rao, J., dissenting, in State of U.P. 
v.  Deoman Upadhyaya , (1961) 1 SCR 14 at 34 further 
went on to state that whereas equality before law i s a 
negative concept, the equal protection of the law h as 
positive content.  The early judgments of this Cour t 
referred to the “discrimination” aspect of Article 14, and 
evolved a rule by which subjects could be classifie d.  If 
the classification was “intelligible” having regard  to the 
object sought to be achieved, it would pass muster 
under Article 14’s anti-discrimination aspect.  Aga in, 
Subba Rao, J., dissenting, in Lachhman Das v. State 339 of Punjab , (1963) 2 SCR 353 at 395, warned that 
overemphasis on the doctrine of classification or a n 
anxious and sustained attempt to discover some basi s 
for classification may gradually and imperceptibly 
deprive the Article of its glorious content.   He r eferred 
to the doctrine of classification as a “subsidiary rule” 
evolved by courts to give practical content to the said 
Article.   
33. In the pre-1974 era, the judgments of this 
Court did refer to the “rule of law” or “positive” aspect of 
Article 14, the concomitant of which is that if an action 
is found to be arbitrary and, therefore, unreasonab le, it 
would negate the equal protection of the law contai ned 
in Article 14 and would be struck down on this grou nd.  
In S.G. Jaisinghani v.  Union of India , (1967) 2 SCR 
703, this Court held: 
“In this context it is important to emphasize 
that the absence of arbitrary power is the 
first essential of the rule of law upon which 
our whole constitutional system is based. In 
a system governed by rule of law, 
discretion, when conferred upon executive 
authorities, must be confined within clearly 
defined limits. The rule of law from this 
point of view means that decisions should 
be made by the application of known 
principles and rules and, in general, such 
decisions should be predictable and the 
citizen should know where he is. If a 340 decision is taken without any principle or 
without any rule it is unpredictable and 
such a decision is the antithesis of a 
decision taken in accordance with the rule 
of law. (See Dicey — “Law of the 
Constitution” — 10th Edn., Introduction cx). 
“Law has reached its finest moments”, 
stated Douglas, J. in United 
States  v. Wunderlick  [342 US 98], “when it 
has freed man from the unlimited discretion 
of some ruler…. Where discretion, is 
absolute, man has always suffered”. It is in 
this sense that the rule of law may be said 
to be the sworn enemy of caprice. 
Discretion, as Lord Mansfield stated it in 
classic terms in the case of John 
Wilkes  [(1770) 4 Burr. 2528 at 2539], 
“means sound discretion guided by law. It 
must be governed by rule, not by humour : 
it must not be arbitrary, vague, and 
fanciful”.”  
                                       (pages 718 –  719) 
 
 This was in the context of service rules being 
seniority rules, which applied to the Income Tax 
Department, being held to be violative of Article 1 4 of 
the Constitution of India.   
34. Similarly, again in the context of an Article 
14 challenge to service rules, this Court held in State 
of Mysore v. S.R. Jayaram , (1968) 1 SCR 349 as 
follows: 
“The principle of recruitment by open 
competition aims at ensuring equality of 
opportunity in the matter of employment and 
obtaining the services of the most 
meritorious candidates. Rules 1 to 8, 9(1) 
and the first part of Rule 9(2) seek to 341 achieve this aim. The last part of Rule 9(2) 
subverts and destroys the basic objectives 
of the preceding rules. It vests in the 
Government an arbitrary power of 
patronage. Though Rule 9(1) requires the 
appointment of successful candidates to 
Class I posts in the order of merit and 
thereafter to Class II posts in the order of 
merit, Rule 9(1) is subject to Rule 9(2), and 
under the cover of Rule 9(2) the 
Government can even arrogate to itself the 
power of assigning a Class I post to a less 
meritorious and a Class II post to a more 
meritorious candidate. We hold that the 
latter part of Rule 9(2) gives the 
Government an arbitrary power of ignoring 
the just claims of successful candidates for 
recruitment to offices under the State. It is 
violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the 
Constitution and must be struck down.”                       
                                        (pages 353 – 354) 
 
35. In the celebrated Indira Gandhi v.  Raj 
Narain judgment, reported in 1975 Supp SCC 1, Article 
329-A sub-clauses (4) and (5) were struck down by a  
Constitution Bench of this Court. Applying the newl y 
evolved basic structure doctrine laid down in 
Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala , (1973) 4 
SCC 225, Ray, C.J. struck down the said amendment 
thus: 
“59. Clause (4) suffers from these 
infirmities. First, the forum might be 
changed but another forum has to be 
created. If the constituent power became 
itself the forum to decide the disputes the 
constituent power by repealing the law in 
relation to election petitions and matters 342 connected therewith did not have any 
petition to seize upon to deal with the 
same. Secondly, any decision is to be 
made in accordance with law. Parliament 
has power to create law and apply the 
same. In the present case, the constituent 
power did not have any law to apply to the 
case, because the previous law did not 
apply and no other law was applied by 
clause (4). The validation of the election in 
the present case is, therefore, not by 
applying any law and it, therefore, offends 
rule of law.”  
(at page 44) 
 
36. This passage is of great significance in that 
the amendment was said to be bad because the 
constituent power did not have any law to apply to the 
case, and this being so, the rule of law contained in the 
Constitution would be violated.  This rule of law h as an 
obvious reference to Article 14 of the Constitution , in 
that it would be wholly arbitrary to decide the cas e 
without applying any law, and would thus violate th e 
rule of law contained in the said Article. Chandrac hud, 
J., was a little more explicit in that he expressly  
referred to Article 14 and stated that Article 329- A is an 
outright negation of the right of equality conferre d by 
Article 14.  This was the case because the law woul d 
be discriminatory in that certain high personages w ould 
be put above the law in the absence of a differenti a 343 reasonably related to the object of the law.  He we nt on 
to add:    
“681. It follows that clauses (4) and (5) of 
Article 329-A are arbitrary and are 
calculated to damage or destroy the rule of 
law. Imperfections of language hinder a 
precise definition of the rule of law as of the 
definition of ‘law’ itself. And the 
Constitutional law of 1975 has undergone 
many changes since A.V. Dicey, the great 
expounder of the rule of law, delivered his 
lectures as Vinerian Professor of English 
law at Oxford, which were published in 
1885 under the title, “ Introduction to the 
Study of the Law of the Constitution ”. But 
so much, I suppose, can be said with 
reasonable certainty that the rule of law 
means that the exercise of powers of 
Government shall be conditioned by law 
and that subject to the exceptions to the 
doctrine of equality, no one shall be 
exposed to the arbitrary will of the 
Government. Dicey gave three meanings to 
rule of law: Absence of arbitrary power, 
equality before the law or the equal 
subjection of all classes to the ordinary law 
of the land administered by ordinary law 
courts and that the Constitution is not the 
source but the consequence of the rights of 
individuals, as defined and enforced by the 
courts. The second meaning grew out of 
Dicey’s unsound dislike of the French Droit 
Administratif which he regarded “as a 
misfortune inflicted upon the benighted folk 
across the Channel” [See S.A. de Smith: 
Judicial Review of Administrative Action, 
(1968) p. 5]. Indeed, so great was his 
influence on the thought of the day that as 
recently as in 1935 Lord Hewart, the Lord 
Chief Justice of England, dismissed the 
term “administrative law” as “continental 
jargon”. The third meaning is hardly 
apposite in the context of our written 344 Constitution for, in India, the Constitution is 
the source of all rights and obligations. We 
may not therefore rely wholly on Dicey’s 
exposition of the rule of law but ever since 
the second world war, the rule has come to 
acquire a positive content in all democratic 
countries. [See Wade and Phillips: 
Constitutional Law (Sixth Edn., pp. 70-73)] 
The International Commission of Jurists, 
which has a consultative status under the 
United Nations, held its Congress in Delhi 
in 1959 where lawyers, judges and law 
teachers representing fifty-three countries 
affirmed that the rule of law is a dynamic 
concept which should be employed to 
safeguard and advance the political and 
civil rights of the individual in a free society. 
One of the committees of that Congress 
emphasised that no law should subject any 
individual to discriminatory treatment. 
These principles must vary from country to 
country depending upon the provisions of 
its Constitution and indeed upon whether 
there exists a written Constitution. As it has 
been said in a lighter vein, to show the 
supremacy of the Parliament, the charm of 
the English Constitution is that “it does not 
exist”. Our Constitution exists and must 
continue to exist. It guarantees equality 
before law and the equal protection of laws 
to everyone. The denial of such equality, as 
modified by the judicially evolved theory of 
classification, is the very negation of rule of 
law.”    
                                                                 (at page 258) 
 
37. This paragraph is an early application of the 
doctrine of arbitrariness which follows from the ru le of 
law contained in Article 14.  It is of some signifi cance 
that Dicey’s formulation of the rule of law was ref erred 
to, which contains both absence of arbitrary power and 345 equality before the law, as being of the essence of  the 
rule of law.   
38. We now come to the development of the 
doctrine of arbitrariness and its application to St ate 
action as a distinct doctrine on which State action  may 
be struck down as being violative of the rule of la w 
contained in Article 14.  In a significant passage 
Bhagwati, J., in E.P. Royappa v.  State of T.N. , (1974) 
4 SCC 3 stated (at page 38): 
“85. The last two grounds of challenge may 
be taken up together for consideration. 
Though we have formulated the third 
ground of challenge as a distinct and 
separate ground, it is really in substance 
and effect merely an aspect of the second 
ground based on violation of Articles 14 
and 16. Article 16 embodies the 
fundamental guarantee that there shall be 
equality of opportunity for all citizens in 
matters relating to employment or 
appointment to any office under the State. 
Though enacted as a distinct and 
independent fundamental right because of 
its great importance as a principle ensuring 
equality of opportunity in public 
employment which is so vital to the building 
up of the new classless egalitarian society 
envisaged in the Constitution, Article 16 is 
only an instance of the application of the 
concept of equality enshrined in Article 14. 
In other words, Article 14 is the genus while 
Article 16 is a species. Article 16 gives 
effect to the doctrine of equality in all 
matters relating to public employment. The 
basic principle which, therefore, informs 
both Articles 14 and 16 is equality and 346 inhibition against discrimination. Now, what 
is the content and reach of this great 
equalising principle? It is a founding faith, 
to use the words of Bose. J., “a way of life”, 
and it must not be subjected to a narrow 
pedantic or lexicographic approach. We 
cannot countenance any attempt to 
truncate its all-embracing scope and 
meaning, for to do so would be to violate its 
activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic 
concept with many aspects and dimensions 
and it cannot be “cribbed, cabined and 
confined” within traditional and doctrinaire 
limits. From a positivistic point of view, 
equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact 
equality and arbitrariness are sworn 
enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a 
republic while the other, to the whim and 
caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an 
act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is 
unequal both according to political logic 
and constitutional law and is therefore 
violative of Article 14 , and if it effects any 
matter relating to public employment, it is 
also violative of Article 16. Articles 14 and 
16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and 
ensure fairness and equality of treatment. 
They require that State action must be 
based on valid relevant principles 
applicable alike to all similarly situate and it 
must not be guided by any extraneous or 
irrelevant considerations because that 
would be denial of equality. Where the 
operative reason for State action, as 
distinguished from motive inducing from the 
antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate 
and relevant but is extraneous and outside 
the area of permissible considerations, it 
would amount to mala fide exercise of 
power and that is hit by Articles 14 and 16. 
Mala fide exercise of power and 
arbitrariness are different lethal radiations 
emanating from the same vice: in fact the 
latter comprehends the former. Both are 
inhibited by Articles 14 and 16.” 347      
 [Emphasis Supplied] 
39. This was further fleshed out in Maneka 
Gandhi v.  Union of India , (1978) 1 SCC 248, where, 
after stating that various fundamental rights must be 
read together and must overlap and fertilize each 
other, Bhagwati, J., further amplified this doctrin e as 
follows (at pages 283-284):  
“The nature and requirement of the 
procedure under Article 21  
 
7. Now, the question immediately arises as 
to what is the requirement of Article 14: 
what is the content and reach of the great 
equalising principle enunciated in this 
article? There can be no doubt that it is a 
founding faith of the Constitution. It is 
indeed the pillar on which rests securely 
the foundation of our democratic republic. 
And, therefore, it must not be subjected to 
a narrow, pedantic or lexicographic 
approach. No attempt should be made to 
truncate its all-embracing scope and 
meaning, for to do so would be to violate its 
activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic 
concept with many aspects and dimensions 
and it cannot be imprisoned within 
traditional and doctrinaire limits. We must 
reiterate here what was pointed out by the 
majority in E.P. Royappa  v. State of Tamil 
Nadu  [(1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 
165 : (1974) 2 SCR 348] namely, that “from 
a positivistic point of view, equality is 
antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality 
and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one 
belongs to the rule of law in a republic, 
while the other, to the whim and caprice of 348 an absolute monarch. Where an act is 
arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal 
both according to political logic and 
constitutional law and is therefore violative 
of Article 14”. Article 14 strikes at 
arbitrariness in State action and ensures 
fairness and equality of treatment. The 
principle of reasonableness, which legally 
as well as philosophically, is an essential 
element of equality or non-arbitrariness 
pervades Article 14 like a brooding 
omnipresence and the procedure 
contemplated by Article 21 must answer 
the test of reasonableness in order to be in 
conformity with Article 14.  It must be “right 
and just and fair” and not arbitrary, fanciful 
or oppressive; otherwise, it would be no 
procedure at all and the requirement of 
Article 21 would not be satisfied.”  
     
 [Emphasis Supplied] 
 40. This was further clarified in A.L. Kalra v.  
Project and Equipment Corpn. , (1984) 3 SCC 316, 
following Royappa  (supra) and holding that 
arbitrariness is a doctrine distinct from discrimin ation. It 
was held: 
“19… It thus appears well-settled that 
Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in 
executive/administrative action because 
any action that is arbitrary must necessarily 
involve the negation of equality. One need 
not confine the denial of equality to a 
comparative evaluation between two 
persons to arrive at a conclusion of 
discriminatory treatment. An action per se 
arbitrary itself denies equal of (sic) 
protection by law. The Constitution Bench 
pertinently observed in Ajay Hasia 349 case  [(1981) 1 SCC 722: 1981 SCC (L&S) 
258: AIR 1981 SC 487: (1981) 2 SCR 79: 
(1981) 1 LLJ 103] and put the matter 
beyond controversy when it said “wherever 
therefore, there is arbitrariness in State 
action whether it be of the Legislature or of 
the executive or of an ‘authority’ under 
Article 12, Article 14 immediately springs 
into action and strikes down such State 
action”. This view was further elaborated 
and affirmed in D.S. Nakara  v. Union of 
India  [(1983) 1 SCC 305: 1983 SCC (L&S) 
145: AIR 1983 SC 130: (1983) UPSC 263]. 
In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India  [(1978) 
1 SCC 248: AIR 1978 SC 597: (1978) 2 
SCR 621] it was observed that Article 14 
strikes at arbitrariness in State action and 
ensures fairness and equality of treatment. 
It is thus too late in the day to contend that 
an executive action shown to be arbitrary is 
not either judicially reviewable or within the 
reach of Article 14.”  
 
                                               (at page 328) 
 
The same view was reiterated in Babita Prasad v.  
State of Bihar , (1993) Suppl. 3 SCC 268 at 285, at 
paragraph 31. 
41. That the arbitrariness doctrine contained in 
Article 14 would apply to negate legislation, 
subordinate legislation and executive action is cle ar 
from a celebrated passage in the case of Ajay Hasia v.  
Khalid Mujib Sehravardi , (1981) 1 SCC 722 (at pages 
740-741):  
“16... The true scope and ambit of Article 
14 has been the subject-matter of 350numerous decisions and it is not necessary 
to make any detailed reference to them. It 
is sufficient to state that the content and 
reach of Article 14 must not be confused 
with the doctrine of classification. 
Unfortunately, in the early stages of the 
evolution of our constitutional law, Article 
14 came to be identified with the doctrine of 
classification because the view taken was 
that that article forbids discrimination and 
there would be no discrimination where the 
classification making the differentia fulfils 
two conditions, namely, (i) that the 
classification is founded on an intelligible 
differentia which distinguishes persons or 
things that are grouped together from 
others left out of the group; and (ii) that that 
differentia has a rational relation to the 
object sought to be achieved by the 
impugned legislative or executive action. It 
was for the first time in E.P. 
Royappa  v. State of Tamil Nadu  [(1974) 4 
SCC 3, 38: 1974 SCC (L&S) 165, 200: 
(1974) 2 SCR 348] that this Court laid bare 
a new dimension of Article 14 and pointed 
out that that article has highly activist 
magnitude and it embodies a guarantee 
against arbitrariness. This Court speaking 
through one of us (Bhagwati, J.) said: [SCC 
p. 38: SCC (L&S) p. 200, para 85] 
 
“The basic principle which, 
therefore, informs both Articles 
14 and 16 is equality and 
inhibition against discrimination. 
Now, what is the content and 
reach of this great equalising 
principle? It is a founding faith, 
to use the words of Bose, J., “a 
way of life”, and it must not be 
subjected to a narrow pedantic 
or lexicographic approach. We 
cannot countenance any 
attempt to truncate its all-
embracing scope and meaning, 351 for to do so would be to violate 
its activist magnitude. Equality 
is a dynamic concept with many 
aspects and dimensions and it 
cannot be “cribbed, cabined 
and confined” within traditional 
and doctrinaire limits. From a 
positivistic point of view, 
equality is antithetic to 
arbitrariness. In fact, equality 
and arbitrariness are sworn 
enemies; one belongs to the 
rule of law in a republic while 
the other, to the whim and 
caprice of an absolute monarch. 
Where an act is arbitrary it is 
implicit in it that it is unequal 
both according to political logic 
and constitutional law and is 
therefore violative of Article 14, 
and if it affects any matter 
relating to public employment, it 
is also violative of Article 16. 
Articles 14 and 16 strike at 
arbitrariness in State action and 
ensure fairness and equality of 
treatment.” 
 
This vital and dynamic aspect which was till 
then lying latent and submerged in the few 
simple but pregnant words of Article 14 was 
explored and brought to light in Royappa  
case [(1975) 1 SCC 485: 1975 SCC (L&S) 
99: (1975) 3 SCR 616] and it was 
reaffirmed and elaborated by this Court 
in Maneka Gandhi  v. Union of India  [(1978) 
1 SCC 248] where this Court again 
speaking through one of us (Bhagwati, J.) 
observed: (SCC pp. 283-84, para 7) 
“Now the question immediately 
arises as to what is the 
requirement of Article 14: What 
is the content and reach of the 
great equalising principle 
enunciated in this Article? 352 There can be no doubt that it is 
a founding faith of the 
Constitution. It is indeed the 
pillar on which rests securely 
the foundation of our 
democratic republic. And, 
therefore, it must not be 
subjected to a narrow, pedantic 
or lexicographic approach. No 
attempt should be made to 
truncate its all-embracing scope 
and meaning, for to do so would 
be to violate its activist 
magnitude. Equality is a 
dynamic concept with many 
aspects and dimensions and it 
cannot be imprisoned within 
traditional and doctrinaire 
limits.... Article 14 strikes at 
arbitrariness in State action and 
ensures fairness and equality of 
treatment. The principle of 
reasonableness, which legally 
as well as philosophically, is an 
essential element of equality or 
non-arbitrariness pervades 
Article 14 like a brooding 
omnipresence.” 
 
This was again reiterated by this Court 
in International Airport Authority  
case [(1979) 3 SCC 489] at p. 1042 (SCC 
p. 511) of the Report. It must therefore now 
be taken to be well settled that what Article 
14 strikes at is arbitrariness because an 
action that is arbitrary, must necessarily 
involve negation of equality. The doctrine of 
classification which is evolved by the courts 
is not paraphrase of Article 14 nor is it the 
objective and end of that article. It is merely 
a judicial formula for determining whether 
the legislative or executive action in 
question is arbitrary and therefore 
constituting denial of equality. If the 
classification is not reasonable and does 353 not satisfy the two conditions referred to 
above, the impugned legislative or 
executive action would plainly be arbitrary 
and the guarantee of equality under Article 
14 would be breached. Wherever therefore 
there is arbitrariness in State action 
whether it be of the legislature or of the 
executive or of an ‘authority’ under Article 
12, Article 14 immediately springs into 
action and strikes down such State action. 
In fact, the concept of reasonableness and 
non-arbitrariness pervades the entire 
constitutional scheme and is a golden 
thread which runs through the whole of the 
fabric of the Constitution .”  
 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
42. In this view of the law, a three Judge Bench 
of this Court in  K.R. Lakshmanan (Dr.)  v.  State of 
T.N. , (1996) 2 SCC 226 , struck down a 1986 Tamil 
Nadu Act on the ground that it was arbitrary and, 
therefore, violative of Article 14.   Two separate 
arguments were addressed under Article 14. One was 
that the Act in question was discriminatory and, 
therefore, violative of Article 14.  The other was that in 
any case the Act was arbitrary and for that reason 
would also violate a separate facet of Article 14.  This 
is clear from paragraph 45 of the said judgment.   The 
judgment went on to accept both these arguments.  I n 
so far as the discrimination aspect is concerned, t his 
Court struck down the 1986 Act on the ground that i t 354 was discriminatory in paragraphs 46 and 47.  
Paragraphs 48 to 50 are important, in that this Cou rt 
struck down the 1986 Act for being arbitrary, 
separately, as follows (at pages 256-257): 
“48. We see considerable force in the 
contention of Mr. Parasaran that the 
acquisition and transfer of the undertaking 
of the Club is arbitrary. The two Acts were 
amended by the 1949 Act and the definition 
of ‘gaming’ was amended. The object of the 
amendment was to include horse-racing in 
the definition of ‘gaming’. The provisions of 
the 1949 Act were, however, not enforced 
till the 1974 Act was enacted and enforced 
with effect from 31-3-1975. The 1974 Act 
was enacted with a view to provide for the 
abolition of wagering or betting on horse-
races in the State of Tamil Nadu. It is thus 
obvious that the consistent policy of the 
State Government, as projected through 
various legislations from 1949 onwards, 
has been to declare horse-racing as 
gambling and as such prohibited under the 
two Acts. The operation of the 1974 Act 
was stayed by this Court and as a 
consequence the horse-races are 
continuing under the orders of this Court. 
The policy of the State Government as 
projected in all the enactments on the 
subject prior to 1986 shows that the State 
Government considered horse-racing as 
gambling and as such prohibited under the 
law. The 1986 Act on the other hand 
declares horse-racing as a public purpose 
and in the interest of the general public. 
There is apparent contradiction in the two 
stands. We do not agree with the 
contention of Mr. Parasaran that the 1986 
Act is a colourable piece of legislation, but 
at the same time we are of the view that no 
public purpose is being served by 355 acquisition and transfer of the undertaking 
of the Club by the Government. We fail to 
understand how the State Government can 
acquire and take over the functioning of the 
race-club when it has already enacted the 
1974 Act with the avowed object of 
declaring horse-racing as gambling? 
Having enacted a law to abolish betting on 
horse-racing and stoutly defending the 
same before this Court in the name of 
public good and public morality, it is not 
open to the State Government to acquire 
the undertaking of horse-racing again in the 
name of public good and public purpose. It 
is ex facie irrational to invoke “public good 
and public purpose” for declaring horse-
racing as gambling and as such prohibited 
under law, and at the same time speak of 
“public purpose and public good” for 
acquiring the race-club and conducting the 
horse-racing by the Government itself. 
Arbitrariness is writ large on the face of the 
provisions of the 1986 Act . 
 
49. We, therefore, hold that the provisions 
of 1986 Act are discriminatory and arbitrary  
and as such violate and infract the right to 
equality enshrined under Article 14 of the 
Constitution. 
 
50. Since we have struck down the 1986 
Act on the ground that it violates Article 14 
of the Constitution, it is not necessary for 
us to go into the question of its validity on 
the ground of Article 19 of the Constitution.”  
 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
43. Close upon the heels of this judgment, a 
discordant note was struck in State of A.P. v.  
McDowell & Co. , (1996) 3 SCC 709.  Another three 356 Judge Bench, in repelling an argument based on the 
arbitrariness facet of Article 14, held: 
“43. Shri Rohinton Nariman submitted that 
inasmuch as a large number of persons 
falling within the exempted categories are 
allowed to consume intoxicating liquors in 
the State of Andhra Pradesh, the total 
prohibition of manufacture and production 
of these liquors is ‘arbitrary’ and the 
amending Act is liable to be struck down on 
this ground alone. Support for this 
proposition is sought from a judgment of 
this Court in State of T.N. v. Ananthi 
Ammal [(1995) 1 SCC 519]. Before, 
however, we refer to the holding in the said 
decision, it would be appropriate to remind 
ourselves of certain basic propositions in 
this behalf. In the United Kingdom, 
Parliament is supreme. There are no 
limitations upon the power of Parliament. 
No court in the United Kingdom can strike 
down an Act made by Parliament on any 
ground. As against this, the United States 
of America has a Federal Constitution 
where the power of the Congress and the 
State Legislatures to make laws is limited in 
two ways, viz., the division of legislative 
powers between the States and the Federal 
Government and the fundamental rights 
(Bill of Rights) incorporated in the 
Constitution. In India, the position is similar 
to the United States of America. The power 
of Parliament or for that matter, the State 
Legislatures is restricted in two ways. A law 
made by Parliament or the legislature can 
be struck down by courts on two grounds 
and two grounds alone, viz., (1) lack of 
legislative competence and (2) violation of 
any of the fundamental rights guaranteed in 
Part III of the Constitution or of any other 
constitutional provision. There is no third 
ground. We do not wish to enter into a 
discussion of the concepts of procedural 357 unreasonableness and substantive 
unreasonableness — concepts inspired by 
the decisions of United States Supreme 
Court. Even in U.S.A., these concepts and 
in particular the concept of substantive due 
process have proved to be of unending 
controversy, the latest thinking tending 
towards a severe curtailment of this ground 
(substantive due process). The main 
criticism against the ground of substantive 
due process being that it seeks to set up 
the courts as arbiters of the wisdom of the 
legislature in enacting the particular piece 
of legislation. It is enough for us to say that 
by whatever name it is characterised, the 
ground of invalidation must fall within the 
four corners of the two grounds mentioned 
above. In other words, say, if an enactment 
is challenged as violative of Article 14, it 
can be struck down only if it is found that it 
is violative of the equality clause/equal 
protection clause enshrined therein. 
Similarly, if an enactment is challenged as 
violative of any of the fundamental rights 
guaranteed by clauses (a) to (g) of Article 
19(1), it can be struck down only if it is 
found not saved by any of the clauses (2) 
to (6) of Article 19 and so on. No enactment 
can be struck down by just saying that it is 
arbitrary or unreasonable. Some or other 
constitutional infirmity has to be found 
before invalidating an Act. An enactment 
cannot be struck down on the ground that 
court thinks it unjustified. Parliament and 
the legislatures, composed as they are of 
the representatives of the people, are 
supposed to know and be aware of the 
needs of the people and what is good and 
bad for them. The court cannot sit in 
judgment over their wisdom. In this 
connection, it should be remembered that 
even in the case of administrative action, 
the scope of judicial review is limited to 
three grounds, viz., (i) unreasonableness, 
which can more appropriately be called 358 irrationality, (ii) illegality and (iii) procedural  
impropriety (see Council of Civil Service 
Unions v. Minister for Civil Service  [1985 
AC 374: (1984) 3 All ER 935: (1984) 3 
WLR 1174] which decision has been 
accepted by this Court as well). The 
applicability of doctrine of proportionality 
even in administrative law sphere is yet a 
debatable issue. (See the opinions of Lords 
Lowry and Ackner in R.  v. Secy. of State for 
Home Deptt., ex p Brind  [1991 AC 696: 
(1991) 1 All ER 720] AC at 766-67 and 
762.) It would be rather odd if an enactment 
were to be struck down by applying the 
said principle when its applicability even in 
administrative law sphere is not fully and 
finally settled. It is one thing to say that a 
restriction imposed upon a fundamental 
right can be struck down if it is 
disproportionate, excessive or 
unreasonable and quite another thing to 
say that the court can strike down 
enactment if it thinks it unreasonable, 
unnecessary or unwarranted.”  
(at pages 737-739)  
 
44. This judgment failed to notice at least two 
binding precedents, first, the judgment of a Consti tution 
Bench in Ajay Hasia  (supra) and second, the judgment 
of a coordinate three judge bench in Lakshmanan 
(supra).  Apart from this, the reasoning contained as to 
why arbitrariness cannot be used to strike down 
legislation as opposed to both executive action and  
subordinate legislation was as follows: 
(1) According to the Bench in McDowell 
(supra), substantive due process is not something 359 accepted by either the American courts or our court s 
and, therefore, this being a reiteration of substan tive 
due process being read into Article 14 cannot be 
applied.  A Constitution Bench in Mohd. Arif v.  
Supreme Court of India , (2014) 9 SCC 737, has held, 
following the celebrated Maneka Gandhi  (supra), as 
follows: 
“27. The stage was now set for the 
judgment in Maneka Gandhi  [Maneka 
Gandhi v. Union of India , (1978) 2 SCR 
621: (1978) 1 SCC 248]. Several 
judgments were delivered, and the upshot 
of all of them was that Article 21 was to be 
read along with other fundamental rights, 
and so read not only has the procedure 
established by law to be just, fair and 
reasonable, but also the law itself has to be 
reasonable as Articles 14 and 19 have now 
to be read into Article 21. [See at SCR pp. 
646-48: SCC pp. 393-95, paras 198-204 
per Beg, C.J., at SCR pp. 669, 671-74 & 
687: SCC pp. 279-84 & 296-97, paras 5-7 
& 18 per Bhagwati, J. and at SCR pp. 720-
23 : SCC pp. 335-39, paras 74-85 per 
Krishna Iyer, J.]. Krishna Iyer, J. set out the 
new doctrine with remarkable clarity thus: 
(SCR p. 723: SCC pp. 338-39, para 85) 
 
“85. To sum up, ‘procedure’ in 
Article 21 means fair, not formal 
procedure. ‘Law’ is reasonable 
law, not any enacted piece. As 
Article 22 specifically spells out 
the procedural safeguards for 
preventive and punitive 
detention, a law providing for 
such detentions should conform 
to Article 22. It has been rightly 360 pointed out that for other rights 
forming part of personal liberty, 
the procedural safeguards 
enshrined in Article 21 are 
available. Otherwise, as the 
procedural safeguards 
contained in Article 22 will be 
available only in cases of 
preventive and punitive 
detention, the right to life, more 
fundamental than any other 
forming part of personal liberty 
and paramount to the 
happiness, dignity and worth of 
the individual, will not be 
entitled to any procedural 
safeguard save such as a 
legislature’s mood chooses.” 
 
28. Close on the heels of Maneka Gandhi 
case  [Maneka Gandhi  v. Union of India , 
(1978) 2 SCR 621: (1978) 1 SCC 248] 
came Mithu  v. State of Punjab  [(1983) 2 
SCC 277: 1983 SCC (Cri) 405], in which 
case the Court noted as follows: (SCC pp. 
283-84, para 6) 
 
“6. … In Sunil Batra  v. Delhi 
Admn . [(1978) 4 SCC 494: 
1979 SCC (Cri) 155], while 
dealing with the question as to 
whether a person awaiting 
death sentence can be kept in 
solitary confinement, Krishna 
Iyer J. said that though our 
Constitution did not have a “due 
process” clause as in the 
American Constitution; the 
same consequence ensued 
after the decisions in Bank 
Nationalisation case  [Rustom 
Cavasjee Cooper (Banks 
Nationalisation)  v. Union of 
India , (1970) 1 SCC 248] 
and Maneka Gandhi 361 case  [Maneka Gandhi  v. Union 
of India , (1978) 2 SCR 621: 
(1978) 1 SCC 248] .… 
 
In Bachan Singh  [Bachan 
Singh  v. State of Punjab , (1980) 
2 SCC 684: 1980 SCC (Cri) 
580] which upheld the 
constitutional validity of the 
death penalty, Sarkaria J., 
speaking for the majority, said 
that if Article 21 is understood in 
accordance with the 
interpretation put upon it 
in Maneka Gandhi  [Maneka 
Gandhi v. Union of India , (1978) 
2 SCR 621 : (1978) 1 SCC 
248], it will read to say that: 
(SCC p. 730, para 136) 
 
‘136. “No person shall be 
deprived of his life or personal 
liberty except according to fair, 
just and reasonable procedure 
established by valid law.”   
 
The wheel has turned full circle. 
Substantive due process is now to be 
applied to the fundamental right to life and 
liberty.”  
                                  (at pages 755-756 ) 
 
   Clearly, therefore, the three Judge Bench has no t 
noticed Maneka Gandhi  (supra) cited in Mohd. Arif  
(supra) to show that the wheel has turned full circ le and 
substantive due process is part of Article 21 as it  is to 
be read with Articles 14 and 19. 362 Mathew, J., while delivering the first Tej Bahadur 
Sapru Memorial Lecture entitled “ Democracy and 
Judicial Review ”, has pointed out: 
“Still another point and I am done.  The 
constitutional makers have formally refused 
to incorporate the “due process clause” in 
our Constitution on the basis, it seems, of 
the advice tendered by Justice Frankfurter 
to Shri B.N. Rau thinking that it will make 
the Court a third Chamber and widen the 
area of Judicial review.  But unwittingly, I 
should think, they have imported the most 
vital and active element of the concept by 
their theory of review of ‘reasonable 
restrictions’ which might be imposed by law 
on many of the fundamental rights.  Taken 
in its modern expanded sense, the 
American “due process clause” stands as a 
high level guarantee of ‘reasonableness’ in 
relation between man and state, an 
injunction against arbitrariness or 
oppressiveness.   I have had occasion to 
consider this question in Kesavananda 
Bharati’s case .  I said: 
 
“When a court adjudges that a 
legislation is bad on the ground 
that it is an unreasonable 
restriction, it is drawing the 
elusive ingredients for its 
conclusion from several 
sources…If you examine the 
cases relating to the imposition 
of reasonable restrictions by a 
law, it will be found that all of 
them adopt a standard which 
the American Supreme Court 
has adopted in adjudging 
reasonableness of a legislation 
under the due process clause.” 363  In fact, Mithu v. State of Punjab , (1983) 2 SCC 277, 
followed a Constitution Bench judgment in Sunil Batra 
v.  Delhi Administration & Ors. , (1978) 4 SCC 494. In 
that case, Section 30(2) of the Prisons Act was 
challenged as being unconstitutional, because every  
prisoner under sentence of death shall be confined in a 
cell apart from all other prisoners, that is to say  he will 
be placed under solitary confinement.   The 
Constitution Bench read down Section 30(2) to refer  
only to a person who is sentenced to death finally,  
which would include petitions for mercy to the 
Governor and/or to the President which have not yet  
been disposed of.  In so holding, Desai, J. speakin g for 
four learned Judges, held (at pages 574-575): 
“228. The challenge under Article 21 must 
fail on our interpretation of sub-section (2) 
of Section 30. Personal liberty of the 
person who is incarcerated is to a great 
extent curtailed by punitive detention. It is 
even curtailed in preventive detention. The 
liberty to move, mix, mingle, talk, share 
company with co-prisoners, if substantially 
curtailed, would be violative of Article 21 
unless the curtailment has the backing of 
law. Sub-section (2) of Section 30 
establishes the procedure by which it can 
be curtailed but it must be read subject to 
our interpretation. The word “law” in the 
expression “procedure established by law” 
in Article 21 has been interpreted to mean 
in Maneka Gandhi’s case  (supra) that the 364 law must be right, just and fair, and not 
arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive. Otherwise 
it would be no procedure at all and the 
requirement of Article 21 would not be 
satisfied. If it is arbitrary it would be 
violative of Article 14 . Once Section 30(2) is 
read down in the manner in which we have 
done, its obnoxious element is erased and 
it cannot be said that it is arbitrary  or that 
there is deprivation of personal liberty 
without the authority of law.”  
                                  [Emphasis Supplie d] 
 
  
In a long and illuminating concurring judgment, Kri shna 
Iyer, J., added (at page 518): 
“52. True, our Constitution has no ‘due 
process’ clause or the VIII Amendment; 
but, in this branch of law, after R.C. Cooper  
v. Union of India , (1970) 1 SCC 248 and 
Maneka Gandhi  v. Union of India , (1978) 1 
SCC 248, the consequence is the same.  
For what is punitively outrageous, 
scandalizingly unusual or cruel and 
rehabilitatively counter-productive, is 
unarguably unreasonable and arbitrary and 
is shot down by Articles 14 and 19  and if 
inflicted with procedural unfairness, falls 
foul of Article 21.” 
  
                                   [Emphasis Suppli ed] 
 
 Coming to Mithu (supra), a Constitution Bench of 
this Court struck down Section 303 of the Indian Pe nal 
Code, by which a mandatory sentence of death was 
imposed on life convicts who commit murder in jail.   
The argument made by the learned counsel on behalf 
of the petitioner was set out thus: 365  
“5. But before we proceed to point out the 
infirmities from which Section 303 suffers, 
we must indicate the nature of the 
argument which has been advanced on 
behalf of the petitioners in order to assail 
the validity of that section. The sum and 
substance of the argument is that the 
provision contained in Section 303 is wholly 
unreasonable and arbitrary and thereby, it 
violates Article 21 of the Constitution which 
affords the guarantee that no person shall 
be deprived of his life or personal liberty 
except in accordance with the procedure 
established by law. Since the procedure by 
which Section 303 authorises the 
deprivation of life is unfair and unjust, the 
Section is unconstitutional. Having 
examined this argument with care and 
concern, we are of the opinion that it must 
be accepted and Section 303 of the Penal 
Code struck down.”  
(at page 283) 
 
 After quoting from Sunil Batra  (supra), the question 
before the Court was set out thus: 
“6……The question which then arises 
before us is whether the sentence of death, 
prescribed by Section 303 of the Penal 
Code for the offence of murder committed 
by a person who is under a sentence of life 
imprisonment, is arbitrary and oppressive 
so as to be violative of the fundamental 
right conferred by Article 21.” 
(at page 285) 
 
After setting out the question thus, the Court 
further stated: 
“9…...Is a law which provides for the 
sentence of death for the offence of 
murder, without affording to the accused an 366 opportunity to show cause why that 
sentence should not be imposed, just and 
fair?  Secondly, is such a law just and fair 
if, in the very nature of things, it does not 
require the court to state the reasons why 
the supreme penalty of law is called for? Is 
it not arbitrary to provide that whatever may 
be the circumstances in which the offence 
of murder was committed, the sentence of 
death shall be imposed upon the accused?” 
(at page 287) 
 
The question was then answered in the following 
manner: 
“18. It is because the death sentence has 
been made mandatory by Section 303 in 
regard to a particular class of persons that, 
as a necessary consequence, they are 
deprived of the opportunity under Section 
235(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code to 
show cause why they should not be 
sentenced to death and the court is 
relieved from its obligation under Section 
354(3) of that Code to state the special 
reasons for imposing the sentence of 
death. The deprivation of these rights and 
safeguards which is bound to result in 
injustice is harsh, arbitrary and unjust.”  
19… To prescribe a mandatory sentence of 
death for the second of such offences for 
the reason that the offender was under the 
sentence of life imprisonment for the first of 
such offences is arbitrary beyond the 
bounds of all reason. Assuming 
that Section 235(2) of the Criminal 
Procedure Code were applicable to the 
case and the court was under an obligation 
to hear the accused on the question of 
sentence, it would have to put some such 
question to the accused: 
“You were sentenced to life 
imprisonment for the offence of 367 forgery. You have committed a 
murder while you were under 
that sentence of life 
imprisonment. Why should you 
not be sentenced to death?” 
The question carries its own refutation. It 
highlights how arbitrary and irrational it is to 
provide for a mandatory sentence of death 
in such circumstances .  
23. On a consideration of the various 
circumstances which we have mentioned in 
this judgment, we are of the opinion that 
Section 303 of the Penal Code violates the 
guarantee of equality contained in Article 
14 as also the right conferred by Article 
21 of the Constitution that no person shall 
be deprived of his life or personal liberty 
except according to procedure established 
by law.”  
(at pages 293, 294 and 296) 
 
 In a concurring judgment, Chinnappa Reddy, J., 
struck down the Section in the following terms: 
“25. Judged in the light shed by Maneka 
Gandhi [(1978) 1 SCC 248] and Bachan 
Singh [(1980) 2 SCC 684], it is impossible 
to uphold Section 303 as valid. Section 303 
excludes judicial discretion. The scales of 
justice are removed from the hands of the 
Judge so soon as he pronounces the 
accused guilty of the offence. So final, so 
irrevocable and so irrestitutable is the 
sentence of death that no law which 
provides for it without involvement of the 
judicial mind can be said to be fair, just and 
reasonable. Such a law must necessarily 
be stigmatised as arbitrary and oppressive. 
Section 303 is such a law and it must go 
the way of all bad laws. I agree with my 
Lord Chief Justice that Section 303, Indian 
Penal Code, must be struck down as 
unconstitutional.” 368 (at page 298)  
 
It is, therefore, clear from a reading of even the 
aforesaid two Constitution Bench judgments that Art icle 
14 has been referred to in the context of the 
constitutional invalidity of statutory law to show that 
such statutory law will be struck down if it is fou nd to be 
“arbitrary”. 
However, the three Judge Bench in Mcdowell 
(supra) dealt with the binding Constitution Bench 
decision in Mithu (supra) as follows (at page 739): 
“45. Reference was then made by Shri G. 
Ramaswamy to the decision 
in Mithu  v. State of Punjab  [(1983) 2 SCC 
277: 1983 SCC (Cri) 405] wherein Section 
303 of the Indian Penal Code was struck 
down. But that decision turned mainly on 
Article 21 though Article 14 is also referred 
to along with Article 21. Not only did the 
offending provision exclude any scope for 
application of judicial discretion, it also 
deprived the accused of the procedural 
safeguards contained in Sections 235(2) 
and 354(3) of the Criminal Procedure 
Code. The ratio of the said decision is thus 
of no assistance to the petitioners herein.” 
 
A binding judgment of five learned Judges of this 
Court cannot be said to be of “no assistance” by st ating 
that the decision turned mainly on Article 21, thou gh 
Article 14 was also referred to. It is clear that t he ratio 369 of the said Constitution Bench was based both  on 
Article 14 and Article 21 as is clear from the judg ment 
of the four learned Judges in paragraphs 19 and 23 set 
out supra. 66   A three Judge Bench in the teeth of this 
                                                 
66  It is clear that one judgment can have more than on e ratio decidendi . This 
was recognized early on by the Privy Council in an appeal from the Supreme Court 
of New South Wales, in Commissioners of Taxation for the State of New Sout h 
Wales v.  Palmer & Others , 1907 Appeal Cases 179 at 184. Lord Macnaghten put  it 
thus:  
“…  But it is impossible to treat a proposition whi ch the court 
declares to be a distinct and sufficient ground for  its decision as a 
mere dictum, simply because there is also another g round stated 
upon which, standing alone, the case might have bee n determined.”  
 
 In Jacobs v.  London County Council , [1950] 1 All E.R. 737 at 741, the House 
of Lords, after referring to some earlier decisions  held, as follows: 
“..However, this may be, there is, in my opinion, n o justification 
for regarding as obiter dictum  a reason given by a judge for his 
decision, because he has given another reason also.   If it were a 
proper test to ask whether the decision would have been the same 
apart from the proposition alleged to be obiter , then a case which 
ex facie  decided two things would decide nothing. A good 
illustration will be found in  London Jewellers, Ltd., v.  
Attenborough ([1934] 2 K.B. 206). In that case the determination  of 
one of the issues depended on how far the Court of Appeal was 
bound by its previous decision in Folkes v.  King  ([1923] 1 K.B. 
282), in which the court had given two grounds for its decision, the 
second of which [as stated by Greer, L.J. ([1934] 2  K.B. 222), in 
Attenborough’s case ([1934] 2 K.B. 206)] was that: 
 
“….where a man obtains possession with authority to  
sell, or to become the owner himself, and then sell s, he 
cannot be treated as having obtained the goods by 
larceny by a trick.” 
 
In Attenborough’s  case ([1934] 2 K.B. 206) it was contended that, 
since there was another reason given for the decisi on in Folkes’  
case ([1923] 1 K.B. 282), the second reason was obiter , but Greer, 
L.J., said ([1934] 2 K.B. 222) in reference to the argument of 
counsel: 
 
“I cannot help feeling that if we were unhampered b y 
authority there is much to be said for this proposi tion 
which commended itself to Swift, J., and which 
commended itself to me in Folkes v.  King  ([1923] 1 K.B. 
282), but that view is not open to us in view of th e 
decision of the Court of Appeal in Folkes v.  King  ([1923] 
1 K.B. 282).  In that case two reasons were given b y all 
the members of the Court of Appeal for their decisi on 
and we are not entitled to pick out the first reaso n as the 
ratio decidendi  and neglect the second, or to pick out the 
second reason as the ratio decidendi and neglect the first; 
we must take both as forming the ground of the 
judgment.” 370 ratio cannot, therefore, be said to be good law. Al so, 
the binding Constitution   Bench decision in Sunil 
Batra (supra), which held arbitrariness as a ground for 
striking down a legislative provision, is not at al l 
referred to in the three Judge Bench decision in 
Mcdowell  (supra). 
(2) The second reason given is that a challenge und er 
Article 14 has to be viewed separately from a chall enge 
under Article 19, which is a reiteration of the poi nt of 
view of A.K. Gopalan v.  State of Madras , 1950 SCR 
88, that fundamental rights must be seen in waterti ght 
compartments.  We have seen how this view was 
upset by an eleven Judge Bench of this Court in 
Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v.  Union of India,  (1970) 1 
SCC 248, and followed in Maneka Gandhi  (supra). 
Arbitrariness in legislation is very much a facet o f 
unreasonableness in Article 19(2) to (6), as has be en 
laid down in several Judgments of this Court, some of 
which are referred to in Om Kumar  (infra) and, 
                                                                                                                                            
So, also, in Cheater v. Cater  ([1918] 1 K.B. 247) Pickford, L.J., 
after citing a passage from the judgment of Mellish , L.J., in Erskine 
v.  Adeane  ((1873), 8 Ch. App. 756), said ([1918] 1 K.B. 252) : 
 
 “That is a distinct statement of the law and not a  
dictum . It is the second ground given by the lord justice  
for his judgment. If a judge states two grounds for  his 
judgment and bases his decision upon both, neither of 
those grounds is a dictum .” 371 therefore, there is no reason why arbitrariness can not 
be used in the aforesaid sense to strike down 
legislation under Article 14 as well. 
(3) The third reason given is that the Courts canno t sit 
in Judgment over Parliamentary wisdom.  Our law 
reports are replete with instance after instance wh ere 
Parliamentary wisdom has been successfully set at 
naught by this Court because such laws did not pass  
muster on account of their being “unreasonable”, wh ich 
is referred to in Om Kumar  (infra).     
We must never forget the admonition given by 
Khanna, J. in State of Punjab v.  Khan Chand , (1974) 
1 SCC 549.  He said: 
“12. It would be wrong to assume that there 
is an element of judicial arrogance in the act 
of the Courts in striking down an enactment. 
The Constitution has assigned to the Courts 
the function of determining as to whether 
the laws made by the Legislature are in 
conformity with the provisions of the 
Constitution. In adjudicating the 
constitutional validity of statutes, the Courts 
discharge an obligation which has been 
imposed upon them by the Constitution. The 
Courts would be shirking their responsibility 
if they hesitate to declare the provisions of a 
statute to be unconstitutional, even though 
those provisions are found to be violative of 
the Articles of the Constitution. Articles 32 
and 226 are an integral part of the 
Constitution and provide remedies for 372 enforcement of fundamental rights and other 
rights conferred by the Constitution. 
Hesitation or refusal on the part of the 
Courts to declare the provisions of an 
enactment to be unconstitutional, even 
though they are found to infringe the 
Constitution because of any notion of 
judicial humility would in a large number of 
cases have the effect of taking away or in 
any case eroding the remedy provided to 
the aggrieved parties by the Constitution. 
Abnegation in matters affecting one’s own 
interest may sometimes be commendable 
but abnegation in a matter where power is 
conferred to protect the interest of others 
against measures which are violative of the 
Constitution is fraught with serious 
consequences. It is as much the duty of the 
courts to declare a provision of an 
enactment to be unconstitutional if it 
contravenes any article of the Constitution 
as it is theirs to uphold its validity in case it 
is found’ to suffer from no such infirmity.”  
 
This again cannot detain us. 
(4)  One more reason given is that the proportional ity 
doctrine, doubtful of application even in administr ative 
law, should not, therefore, apply to this facet of Article 
14 in constitutional law.  Proportionality as a 
constitutional doctrine has been highlighted in Om 
Kumar v.  Union of India,  (2001) 2 SCC 386 at 400-
401 as follows: 
“30. On account of a Chapter on 
Fundamental Rights in Part III of our 
Constitution right from 1950, Indian Courts 
did not suffer from the disability similar to 
the one experienced by English Courts for 373 declaring as unconstitutional legislation  on 
the principle of proportionality or reading 
them in a manner consistent with the 
charter of rights. Ever since 1950, the 
principle of “proportionality” has indeed 
been applied vigorously to legislative (and 
administrative) action in India. While 
dealing with the validity of legislation 
infringing fundamental freedoms 
enumerated in Article 19(1) of the 
Constitution of India — such as freedom of 
speech and expression, freedom to 
assemble peaceably, freedom to form 
associations and unions, freedom to move 
freely throughout the territory of India, 
freedom to reside and settle in any part of 
India — this Court has occasion to consider 
whether the restrictions imposed by 
legislation were disproportionate to the 
situation and were not the least restrictive 
of the choices. The burden of proof to show 
that the restriction was reasonable lay on 
the State. “Reasonable restrictions” under 
Articles 19(2) to (6) could be imposed on 
these freedoms only by legislation and 
courts had occasion throughout to consider 
the proportionality of the restrictions. In 
numerous judgments of this Court, the 
extent to which “reasonable restrictions” 
could be imposed was considered. 
In Chintamanrao  v. State of M.P.  [AIR 1951 
SC 118: 1950 SCR 759] Mahajan, J. (as he 
then was) observed that “reasonable 
restrictions” which the State could impose 
on the fundamental rights “should not be 
arbitrary or of an excessive nature, beyond 
what is required  in the interests of the 
public”. “Reasonable” implied intelligent 
care and deliberation, that is, the choice  of 
a course which reason dictated. Legislation 
which arbitrarily or excessively invaded the 
right could not be said to contain the quality 
of reasonableness unless it struck a proper 
balance  between the rights guaranteed and 
the control permissible under Articles 19(2) 374 to (6). Otherwise, it must be held to be 
wanting in that quality. Patanjali Sastri, C.J. 
in State of Madras v. V.G. Row  [AIR 1952 
SC 196: 1952 SCR 597: 1952 Cri LJ 966], 
observed that the Court must keep in mind 
the “nature of the right alleged to have 
been infringed, the underlying purpose of 
the restrictions imposed, the extent and 
urgency of the evil sought to be remedied 
thereby, the disproportion  of the imposition, 
the prevailing conditions at the time”. This 
principle of proportionality vis-à-vis 
legislation was referred to by Jeevan 
Reddy, J. in State of A.P.  v. McDowell & 
Co. [(1996) 3 SCC 709] recently. This level 
of scrutiny has been a common feature in 
the High Court and the Supreme Court in 
the last fifty years. Decided cases run into 
thousands. 
 
31. Article 21 guarantees liberty and has 
also been subjected to principles of 
“proportionality”. Provisions of the Criminal 
Procedure Code, 1974 and the Indian 
Penal Code came up for consideration 
in Bachan Singh  v. State of Punjab  [(1980) 
2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580] the 
majority upholding the legislation. The 
dissenting judgment of Bhagwati, J. 
(see Bachan Singh  v. State of 
Punjab  [(1982) 3 SCC 24 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 
535]) dealt elaborately with “proportionality” 
and held that the punishment provided by 
the statute was disproportionate . 
 
32. So far as Article 14 is concerned, the 
courts in India examined whether the 
classification was based on intelligible 
differentia and whether the differentia had a 
reasonable nexus with the object of the 
legislation. Obviously, when the courts 
considered the question whether the 
classification was based on intelligible 
differentia, the courts were examining the 
validity of the differences and the adequacy 375 of the differences. This is again nothing but 
the principle of proportionality. There are 
also cases where legislation or rules have 
been struck down as being arbitrary in the 
sense of being unreasonable [see Air 
India  v. Nergesh Meerza [(1981) 4 SCC 
335: 1981 SCC (L&S) 599] (SCC at pp. 
372-373)]. But this latter aspect of striking 
down legislation only on the basis of 
“arbitrariness” has been doubted in State of 
A.P. v. McDowell and Co. [(1996) 3 SCC 
709] .”  
 
45. The thread of reasonableness runs through 
the entire fundamental rights Chapter.  What is 
manifestly arbitrary is obviously unreasonable and 
being contrary to the rule of law, would violate Ar ticle 
14.  Further, there is an apparent contradiction in  the 
three Judges’ Bench decision in McDowell  (supra) 
when it is said that a constitutional challenge can  
succeed on the ground that a law is “disproportiona te, 
excessive or unreasonable”, yet such challenge woul d 
fail on the very ground of the law being “unreasona ble, 
unnecessary or unwarranted”.  The arbitrariness 
doctrine when applied to legislation obviously woul d 
not involve the latter challenge but would only inv olve a 
law being disproportionate, excessive or otherwise 
being manifestly unreasonable.  All the aforesaid 
grounds, therefore, do not seek to differentiate 376 between State action in its various forms, all of w hich 
are interdicted if they fall foul of the fundamenta l rights 
guaranteed to persons and citizens in Part III of t he 
Constitution. 
46. We only need to point out that even after 
McDowell (supra), this Court has in fact negated 
statutory law on the ground of it being arbitrary a nd 
therefore violative of Article 14 of the Constituti on of 
India.  In Malpe Vishwanath Acharya v.  State of 
Maharashtra , (1998) 2 SCC 1, this Court held that 
after passage of time, a law can become arbitrary, and, 
therefore, the freezing of rents at a 1940 market v alue 
under the Bombay Rent Act would be arbitrary and 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of Indi a (see 
paragraphs 8 to 15 and 31). 
47. Similarly in Mardia Chemicals Ltd. & Ors. 
v.  Union of India & Ors. etc. etc.,  (2004) 4 SCC 311 
at 354, this Court struck down Section 17(2) of the  
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Asse ts 
and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, as 
follows:  
“64. The condition of pre-deposit in the 
present case is bad rendering the remedy 
illusory on the grounds that: ( i) it is 377 imposed while approaching the 
adjudicating authority of the first instance, 
not in appeal, ( ii) there is no determination 
of the amount due as yet, ( iii) the secured 
assets or their management with 
transferable interest is already taken over 
and under control of the secured creditor, 
(iv ) no special reason for double security in 
respect of an amount yet to be determined 
and settled, ( v) 75% of the amount claimed 
by no means would be a meagre amount, 
and ( vi) it will leave the borrower in a 
position where it would not be possible for 
him to raise any funds to make deposit of 
75% of the undetermined demand. Such 
conditions are not only onerous and 
oppressive but also unreasonable and 
arbitrary. Therefore, in our view, sub-
section (2) of Section 17 of the Act is 
unreasonable, arbitrary and violative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution.”  
 
48. In two other fairly recent judgments namely 
State of Tamil Nadu v.  K. Shyam Sunder , (2011) 8 
SCC 737 at paragraphs 50 to 53, and A.P. Dairy 
Development Corpn. Federation v.  B. Narasimha 
Reddy , (2011) 9 SCC 286 at paragraph 29, this Court 
reiterated the position of law that a legislation c an be 
struck down on the ground that it is arbitrary and 
therefore violative of Article 14 of the Constituti on. 
49. In a Constitution Bench decision in Ashoka Kumar 
Thakur  v. Union of India , (2008) 6 SCC 1 at 524, an 
extravagant argument that the impugned legislation 
was intended to please a section of the community a s 378 part of the vote catching mechanism was held to not  be 
a legally acceptable plea and rejected by holding t hat: 
“219 . A legislation passed by Parliament 
can be challenged only on constitutionally 
recognised grounds. Ordinarily, grounds of 
attack of a legislation is whether the 
legislature has legislative competence or 
whether the legislation is ultra vires the 
provisions of the Constitution. If any of the 
provisions of the legislation violates 
fundamental rights or any other provisions 
of the Constitution, it could certainly be a 
valid ground to set aside the legislation by 
invoking the power of judicial review. A 
legislation could also be challenged as 
unreasonable if it violates the principles of 
equality adumbrated in our Constitution or it 
unreasonably restricts the fundamental 
rights under Article 19 of the Constitution. A 
legislation cannot be challenged simply on 
the ground of unreasonableness because 
that by itself does not constitute a ground. 
The validity of a constitutional amendment 
and the validity of plenary legislation have 
to be decided purely as questions of 
constitutional law. This Court in State of 
Rajasthan v. Union of India  [(1977) 3 SCC 
592] said: (SCC p. 660, para 149) 
“149 . … if a question brought 
before the court is purely a 
political question not involving 
determination of any legal or 
constitutional right or obligation, 
the court would not entertain it, 
since the court is concerned 
only with adjudication of legal 
rights and liabilities.” 
 
50. A subsequent Constitution Bench in K.T. 
Plantation (P) Ltd. v.  State of Karnataka , (2011) 9 
SCC 1, dealt with the constitutional validity of th e 379 Roerich and Devikarani Roerich Estate (Acquisition 
and Transfer) Act, 1996, the legal validity of Sect ion 
110 of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961, 
Notification No. RD 217 LRA 93 dated 8-3-1994 issue d 
by the State Government thereunder and the scope 
and content of Article 300-A of the Constitution. W hile 
examining the validity of a legislation which depri ves a 
person of property under Article 300-A, this Court when 
faced with Mcdowell (supra) pointed out that (at page 
58): 
“203 . Even in McDowell case  [(1996) 3 
SCC 709], it was pointed out that some or 
other constitutional infirmity may be 
sufficient to invalidate the statute. A three-
Judge Bench of this Court in McDowell & 
Co. case  [(1996) 3 SCC 709] held as 
follows: (SCC pp. 737-38, para 43)  
“43 . … The power of Parliament 
or for that matter, the State 
Legislatures is restricted in two 
ways. A law made by 
Parliament or the legislature 
can be struck down by courts 
on two grounds and two 
grounds alone viz. ( 1) lack of 
legislative competence and ( 2) 
violation of any of the 
fundamental rights guaranteed 
in Part III of the Constitution or 
of any other constitutional 
provision. There is no third 
ground.… No enactment can be 
struck down by just saying that 
it is arbitrary or unreasonable. 
Some or other constitutional 380 infirmity has to be found before 
invalidating an Act. An 
enactment cannot be struck 
down on the ground that court 
thinks it unjustified. Parliament 
and the legislatures, composed 
as they are of the 
representatives of the people, 
are supposed to know and be 
aware of the needs of the 
people and what is good and 
bad for them. The court cannot 
sit in judgment over their 
wisdom.” 
204 . A two-Judge Bench of this Court 
in Union of India  v. G. Ganayutham  [(1997) 
7 SCC 463: 1997 SCC (L&S) 1806], after 
referring to McDowell case  [(1996) 3 SCC 
709] stated as under: ( G. Ganayutham 
case  [(1997) 7 SCC 463: 1997 SCC (L&S) 
1806] , SCC p. 476, para 22) 
“22. … That a statute can be 
struck down if the restrictions 
imposed by it are 
disproportionate or excessive 
having regard to the purpose of 
the statute  and that the court 
can go into the question 
whether there is a 
proper balancing  of the 
fundamental right and the 
restriction imposed, is well 
settled.” 
205 . Plea of unreasonableness, 
arbitrariness, proportionality, etc. always 
raises an element of subjectivity on which a 
court cannot strike down a statute or a 
statutory provision, especially when the 
right to property is no more a fundamental 
right.  Otherwise the court will be 
substituting its wisdom to that of the 
legislature, which is impermissible in our 
constitutional democracy.” 
[Emphasis Supplied] 381 51. In a recent Constitution Bench decision in Natural 
Resources Allocation, In re, Special Reference No.1  
of 2012 , (2012) 10 SCC 1, this Court went into the 
arbitrariness doctrine in some detail.  It referred  to 
Royappa (supra),  Maneka Gandhi (supra)  and  Ajay 
Hasia (supra) (and quoted from paragraph 16 which 
says that “… the impugned legislative  or executive 
action would plainly be arbitrary and the guarantee  of 
equality under Article 14 would be breached…”).  It  
then went on to state that “arbitrariness” and 
“unreasonableness” have been used interchangeably 
as follows: 
“103. As is evident from the above, the 
expressions “arbitrariness” and 
“unreasonableness” have been used 
interchangeably and in fact, one has been 
defined in terms of the other. More recently, 
in Sharma Transport  v. Govt. of A.P. 
[(2002) 2 SCC 188], this Court has 
observed thus: (SCC pp. 203-04, para 25) 
 
“25 . … In order to be described 
as arbitrary, it must be shown 
that it was not reasonable and 
manifestly arbitrary. The 
expression ‘arbitrarily’ means: 
in an unreasonable manner, as 
fixed or done capriciously or at 
pleasure, without adequate 
determining principle, not 
founded in the nature of things, 
non-rational, not done or acting 
according to reason or 382 judgment, depending on the will 
alone.” 
    
 (at page 81) 
 
After stating all this, it then went on to comment,  
referring to McDowell (supra)  that  no arbitrary use 
should be made of the arbitrariness doctrine.  It t hen 
concluded (at page 83): 
“107. From a scrutiny of the trend of 
decisions it is clearly perceivable that the 
action of the State, whether it relates to 
distribution of largesse, grant of contracts 
or allotment of land, is to be tested on the 
touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution. 
A law may not be struck down for being 
arbitrary without the pointing out of a 
constitutional infirmity as McDowell 
case  [(1996) 3 SCC 709] has said. 
Therefore, a State action  has  to  be  
tested  for  constitutional   infirmities   qua    
Article  14  of  the   Constitution.   The   
action   has   to   be    fair,     reasonable,                              
non-discriminatory, transparent, non-
capricious, unbiased, without favouritism or 
nepotism, in pursuit of promotion of healthy 
competition and equitable treatment. It 
should conform to the norms which are 
rational, informed with reasons and guided 
by public interest, etc.  All these principles 
are inherent in the fundamental conception 
of Article 14. This is the mandate of Article 
14 of the Constitution of India.”  
 
     [Emphasis Supplied] 
 
 
On a reading of this judgment, it is clear that thi s Court 
did not read McDowell (supra) as being an authority 383 for the proposition that legislation can never be s truck 
down as being arbitrary.   Indeed the Court, after 
referring to all the earlier judgments, and Ajay Hasia  
(supra) in particular, which stated that legislatio n can 
be struck down on the ground that it is “arbitrary”  under 
Article 14, went on to conclude that “arbitrariness ” 
when applied to legislation cannot be used loosely.    
Instead, it broad based the test, stating that if a  
constitutional infirmity is found, Article 14 will interdict 
such infirmity. And a constitutional infirmity is f ound in 
Article 14 itself whenever legislation is “manifest ly 
arbitrary”; i.e. when  it is not fair, not reasonab le,  
discriminatory, not transparent, capricious, biased , with 
favoritism or nepotism and not in pursuit of promot ion 
of healthy competition and equitable treatment.  
Positively speaking, it should conform to norms whi ch 
are rational, informed with reason and guided by pu blic 
interest, etc.  
52. Another Constitution Bench decision reported as  
Dr. Subramanian Swamy  v. Director, Central 
Bureau of Investigation , (2014) 8 SCC 682, dealt with 
a challenge to Section 6-A of the Delhi Special Pol ice 
Establishment Act, 1946.  This Section was ultimate ly 384 struck down as being discriminatory and hence 
violative of Article 14. A specific reference had b een 
made to the Constitution Bench by the reference ord er 
in Dr. Subramanian Swamy  v. Director, Central 
Bureau of Investigation , (2005) 2 SCC 317, and after 
referring to several judgments including Ajay Hasia 
(supra),  Mardia Chemicals (supra),  Malpe 
Vishwanath Acharya (supra)  and  McDowell (supra),  
the reference inter alia  was as to whether arbitrariness 
and unreasonableness, being facets of Article 14, a re 
or are not available as grounds to invalidate a 
legislation.  
 After referring to the submissions of counsel, and  
several judgments on the discrimination aspect of 
Article 14, this Court held: 
“48. In E.P. Royappa  [E.P. 
Royappa  v. State of T.N. , (1974) 4 SCC 3: 
1974 SCC (L&S) 165], it has been held by 
this Court that the basic principle which 
informs both Articles 14 and 16 are equality 
and inhibition against discrimination. This 
Court observed in para 85 as under: (SCC 
p. 38) 
 
“85 . … From a positivistic point 
of view, equality is antithetic to 
arbitrariness. In fact equality 
and arbitrariness are sworn 
enemies; one belongs to the 
rule of law in a republic while 385 the other, to the whim and 
caprice of an absolute monarch. 
Where an act is arbitrary, it is 
implicit in it that it is unequal 
both according to political logic 
and constitutional law and is 
therefore violative of Article 14, 
and if it affects any matter 
relating to public employment, it 
is also violative of Article 16. 
Articles 14 and 16 strike at 
arbitrariness in State action and 
ensure fairness and equality of 
treatment.” 
 
Court's approach  
 
49. Where there is challenge to the 
constitutional validity of a law enacted by 
the legislature, the Court must keep in view 
that there is always a presumption of 
constitutionality of an enactment, and a 
clear transgression of constitutional 
principles must be shown. The fundamental 
nature and importance of the legislative 
process needs to be recognised by the 
Court and due regard and deference must 
be accorded to the legislative process. 
Where the legislation is sought to be 
challenged as being unconstitutional and 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, 
the Court must remind itself to the 
principles relating to the applicability of 
Article 14 in relation to invalidation of 
legislation. The two dimensions of Article 
14 in its application to legislation and 
rendering legislation invalid are now well 
recognised and these are: ( i) 
discrimination, based on an impermissible 
or invalid classification, and ( ii) excessive 
delegation of powers; conferment of 
uncanalised and unguided powers on the 
executive, whether in the form of delegated 
legislation or by way of conferment of 
authority to pass administrative orders—if 386 such conferment is without any guidance, 
control or checks, it is violative of Article 14 
of the Constitution. The Court also needs to 
be mindful that a legislation does not 
become unconstitutional merely because 
there is another view or because another 
method may be considered to be as good 
or even more effective, like any issue of 
social, or even economic policy. It is well 
settled that the courts do not substitute 
their views on what the policy is.”  
(at pages 721-722) 
 
 Since the Court ultimately struck down Section 6-A  
on the ground that it was discriminatory, it became  
unnecessary to pronounce on one of the questions 
referred to it, namely, as to whether arbitrariness  could 
be a ground for invalidating legislation under Arti cle 14.  
Indeed the Court said as much in paragraph 98 of th e 
judgment as under (at page 740): 
“Having considered the impugned provision 
contained in Section 6-A and for the 
reasons indicated above, we do not think 
that it is necessary to consider the other 
objections challenging the impugned 
provision in the context of Article 14.” 
 
 
53. However, in State of Bihar  v. Bihar 
Distillery Ltd. , (1997) 2 SCC 453 at paragraph 22, in 
State of M.P. v.  Rakesh Kohli , (2012) 6 SCC 312 at 
paragraphs 17 to 19, in Rajbala v.  State of Haryana & 
Ors. , (2016) 2 SCC 445 at paragraphs 53 to 65 and 387 Binoy Viswam  v. Union of India , (2017) 7 SCC 59 at 
paragraphs 80 to 82, McDowell  (supra) was read as 
being an absolute bar to the use of “arbitrariness”  as a 
tool to strike down legislation under Article 14. A s has 
been noted by us earlier in this judgment, Mcdowell 
(supra) itself is per incuriam, not having noticed several 
judgments of Benches of equal or higher strength, i ts 
reasoning even otherwise being flawed. The 
judgments, following McDowell (supra)  are, therefore, 
no longer good law.  
 
54. To complete the picture, it is important to 
note that subordinate legislation can be struck dow n on 
the ground that it is arbitrary and, therefore, vio lative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution.  In Cellular Operators 
Association of India v. Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India , (2016) 7 SCC 703, this Court 
referred to earlier precedents, and held: 
“Violation of fundamental rights 
42. We have already seen that one of the 
tests for challenging the constitutionality of 
subordinate legislation is that subordinate 
legislation should not be manifestly 
arbitrary. Also, it is settled law that 
subordinate legislation can be challenged 
on any of the grounds available for 
challenge against plenary legislation. 388 (See Indian Express Newspapers 
(Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of India  [(1985) 
1 SCC 641: 1985 SCC (Tax) 121], SCC at 
p. 689, para 75.) 
 
43. The test of “manifest arbitrariness” is 
well explained in two judgments of this 
Court. In Khoday Distilleries Ltd. v. State of 
Karnataka  [(1996) 10 SCC 304], this Court 
held: (SCC p. 314, para 13) 
 
 
“13. It is next submitted before 
us that the amended Rules are 
arbitrary, unreasonable and 
cause undue hardship and, 
therefore, violate Article 14 of 
the Constitution. Although the 
protection of Article 19(1)(g) 
may not be available to the 
appellants, the Rules must, 
undoubtedly, satisfy the test of 
Article 14, which is a guarantee 
against arbitrary action. 
However, one must bear in 
mind that what is being 
challenged here under Article 
14 is not executive action but 
delegated legislation. The tests 
of arbitrary action which apply 
to executive actions do not 
necessarily apply to delegated 
legislation. In order that 
delegated legislation can be 
struck down, such legislation 
must be manifestly arbitrary; a 
law which could not be 
reasonably expected to 
emanate from an authority 
delegated with the law-making 
power . In Indian Express 
Newspapers (Bombay) (P) 
Ltd.  v. Union of India  [(1985) 1 
SCC 641 : 1985 SCC (Tax) 
121], this Court said that a 389 piece of subordinate legislation 
does not carry the same degree 
of immunity which is enjoyed by 
a statute passed by a 
competent legislature. A 
subordinate legislation may be 
questioned under Article 14 on 
the ground that it is 
unreasonable; ‘unreasonable 
not in the sense of not being 
reasonable, but in the sense 
that it is manifestly arbitrary’ . 
Drawing a comparison between 
the law in England and in India, 
the Court further observed that 
in England the Judges would 
say, ‘Parliament never intended 
the authority to make such 
Rules; they are unreasonable 
and ultra vires’. In India, 
arbitrariness is not a separate 
ground since it will come within 
the embargo of Article 14 of the 
Constitution. But subordinate 
legislation must be so arbitrary 
that it could not be said to be in 
conformity with the statute or 
that it offends Article 14 of the 
Constitution .”                             
 
44. Also, in Sharma Transport  v. State of 
A.P. [(2002) 2 SCC 188], this Court held: 
(SCC pp. 203-04, para 25) 
 
“25. … The tests of arbitrary 
action applicable to executive 
action do not necessarily apply 
to delegated legislation. In order 
to strike down a delegated 
legislation as arbitrary it has to 
be established that there is 
manifest arbitrariness. In order 
to be described as arbitrary, it 
must be shown that it was not 
reasonable and manifestly 390 arbitrary. The expression 
“arbitrarily” means: in an 
unreasonable manner, as fixed 
or done capriciously or at 
pleasure, without adequate 
determining principle, not 
founded in the nature of things, 
non-rational, not done or acting 
according to reason or 
judgment, depending on the will 
alone.” 
(at pages 736-737) 
 
 
55. It will be noticed that a Constitution Bench of  
this Court in Indian Express Newspapers  v. Union of 
India , (1985) 1 SCC 641, stated that it was settled law 
that subordinate legislation can be challenged on a ny 
of the grounds available for challenge against plen ary 
legislation.  This being the case, there is no rati onal 
distinction between the two types of legislation wh en it 
comes to this ground of challenge under Article 14.   
The test of manifest arbitrariness, therefore, as l aid 
down in the aforesaid judgments would apply to 
invalidate legislation as well as subordinate legis lation 
under Article 14.  Manifest arbitrariness, therefor e, 
must be something done by the legislature 
capriciously, irrationally and/or without adequate 
determining principle.  Also, when something is don e 
which is excessive and disproportionate, such 391 legislation would be manifestly arbitrary.  We are,  
therefore, of the view that arbitrariness in the se nse of 
manifest arbitrariness as pointed out by us above 
would apply to negate legislation as well under Art icle 
14. 
56. Applying the test of manifest arbitrariness to 
the case at hand, it is clear that Triple Talaq is a form 
of Talaq which is itself considered to be something  
innovative, namely, that it is not in the Sunna, be ing an 
irregular or heretical form of Talaq.  We have noti ced 
how in Fyzee’s book (supra),  the Hanafi school of 
Shariat law, which itself recognizes this form of T alaq, 
specifically states that though lawful it is sinful  in that it 
incurs the wrath of God.  Indeed, in Shamim Ara v. 
State of U.P. , (2002) 7 SCC 518, this Court after 
referring to a number of authorities including cert ain 
recent High Court judgments held as under: 
“13…The correct law of talaq  as ordained 
by the Holy Quran is that talaq  must be for 
a reasonable cause and be preceded by 
attempts at reconciliation between the 
husband and the wife by two arbiters — 
one from the wife’s family and the other 
from the husband’s; if the attempts 
fail, talaq  may be effected (para 13). 
In Rukia Khatun case  [(1981) 1 Gau LR 
375] the Division Bench stated that the 
correct law of talaq , as ordained by the 392 Holy Quran, is: ( i) that “talaq” must be for a 
reasonable cause; and ( ii) that it must be 
preceded by an attempt of reconciliation 
between the husband and the wife by two 
arbiters, one chosen by the wife from her 
family and the other by the husband from 
his. If their attempts fail, “ talaq ” may be 
effected. The Division Bench expressly 
recorded its dissent from the Calcutta and 
Bombay views which, in their opinion, did 
not lay down the correct law.  
14. We are in respectful agreement with the 
abovesaid observations made by the 
learned Judges of the High Courts.” 
   
(at page 526) 
 
57. Given the fact that Triple Talaq is instant and  
irrevocable, it is obvious that any attempt at 
reconciliation between the husband and wife by two 
arbiters from their families, which is essential to  save 
the marital tie, cannot ever take place.  Also, as 
understood by the Privy Council in Rashid Ahmad 
(supra), such Triple Talaq is valid even if it is n ot for 
any reasonable cause, which view of the law no long er 
holds good after Shamim Ara  (supra).  This being the 
case, it is clear that this form of Talaq is manife stly 
arbitrary in the sense that the marital tie can be broken 
capriciously and whimsically by a Muslim man withou t 
any attempt at reconciliation so as to save it.  Th is form 
of Talaq must, therefore, be held to be violative o f the 393 fundamental right contained under Article 14 of the  
Constitution of India.  In our opinion, therefore, the 
1937 Act, insofar as it seeks to recognize and enfo rce 
Triple Talaq, is within the meaning of the expressi on 
“laws in force” in Article 13(1) and must be struck  down 
as being void to the extent that it recognizes and 
enforces Triple Talaq.  Since we have declared Sect ion 
2 of the 1937 Act to be void to the extent indicate d 
above on the narrower ground of it being manifestly  
arbitrary, we do not find the need to go into the g round 
of discrimination in these cases, as was argued by the 
learned Attorney General and those supporting him.  
 
    
 …………………………………J. 
    (Rohinton Fali Nariman) 
 
 
    
 …………………………………J. 
     (Uday Umesh Lalit) 
 
New Delhi; 
August 22, 2017. 394 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
Original Civil Jurisdiction 
 
Writ Petition (C) No. 118 of 2016  
Shayara Bano      … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 
 
with  
 
Suo Motu Writ (C) No. 2 of 2015  
In Re: Muslim Women’s Quest For Equality 
 
versus 
Jamiat Ulma-I-Hind 
 
Writ Petition(C) No. 288 of 2016  
Aafreen Rehman     … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 
 
 
Writ Petition(C) No. 327 of 2016  
Gulshan Parveen     … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 
 
 
Writ Petition(C) No. 665 of 2016  
Ishrat Jahan      … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 
 
 
Writ Petition(C) No. 43 of 2017  
Atiya Sabri      … Petitioner 
versus 
Union of India and others    … Respondents 395 ORDER OF THE COURT  
 
 
 In view of the different opinions recorded, by a ma jority 
of 3:2 the practice of ‘talaq-e-biddat’ – triple talaq is  set aside. 
 
 
..………………..…..………CJI. 
           (Jagdish Singh Khehar) 
 
 
 
..………………..…..…….……J. 
           (Kurian Joseph) 
 
 
 
..………………..…..…….……J. 
           (Rohinton Fali Nariman) 
 
 
..………………..…..…….……J. 
           (Uday Umesh Lalit) 
 
 
 
..………………..…..…….……J. 
           (S. Abdul Nazeer) 
New Delhi; 
August 22, 2017.